An Exercise in Rhetoric
“To be a good soldier you must love the army. To be a good commander you must be able to order the death of the thing you love.” ― General Robert E. Lee 
I am not entirely certain what inspired me to write this piece, except that I was thinking about rhetorical questions— a question asked in order to create a dramatic effect or to make a point rather than to get an answer. Such questions may come from dilemmas, much like the one faced by General Lee in the statement above. However, my favorite rhetorical question was asked by a contemporary of Lee, a college professor from the state of Maine.
 “... a rhetorical question. It has a question mark at the end, but you are not meant to answer it because the person who is asking it already knows the answer.” ― Mark Haddon, The Curious Incident of the Dog in the Night-Time 
A Long Way from Bowdoin College
In 1861, while Confederate forces were besieging Fort Sumpter that guarded the entrance to Charleston Harbor, Joshua Lawrence Chamberlain was busily engaged in preparing students to analyze the world they lived in through Rhetoric. As a Professor of Rhetoric at Bowdoin College in Maine, Chamberlain would otherwise have been a world away from Charleston, SC, except he was an ardent supporter of abolition and dissolving the institution of slavery. [1] To Chamberlain, the issue was more than one of rhetoric.
What is Rhetoric?
Rhetoric is the study of persuasive communication, incorporating effective speaking and writing. For most of its history, dating back to at least the time of Plato, it has maintained its fundamental character as a discipline for training students 1) to perceive how language is at work orally and in writing, and 2) to become proficient in applying the resources of language in their own speaking and writing. Chamberlain, during that summer of 1961, had determined that rhetoric was not enough to ignite legislation against slavery. In August of the following year, he was commissioned a lieutenant colonel in the 20th Maine Volunteer Infantry Regiment, and shortly thereafter fought at the Battle of Fredericksburg, an utter defeat for the demoralized Army of the Potomac.
Some of you may recall actor Jeff Daniel’s portrayal of Chamberlain in the Turner Broadcasting production, Gettysburg, based on Michael Shaara’s novel, The Killer Angels. Shaara’s novel is historical fiction, and had made its way to the U.S. Army’s list of recommended reading for Army leaders. Rather accurately depicting the events of the Battle of Gettysburg (July 1863), Shaara created dialog between players that may or may not have been as accurate, even though much research was applied to investigate what might have been said. This is a characteristic of historical fiction. At any rate, Chamberlain was a central character in its scheme.
 
A Small Hill in a Big Country
Little Round Top (39.792310, -77.236070) is a prominent terrain feature that marked the southernmost portion of the Union defenses approximately three miles south of the town of Gettysburg, PA. It was a place that General George Gordon Meade, commanding the Army of the Potomac, deemed as not a probable approach for General Robert E. Lee’s Army of Northern Virginia. Colonel Chamberlain, now the commander of the 20th Maine, was tasked with maintaining the Union flank. Having what he assumed was an adequate basic load of ammunition for fulfilling the task, Chamberlain was ordered to hold to the last. In the movie, Jeff Daniel’s rhetorical thoughts are dramatic:
“Hold to the last. To the last what? Exercise in rhetoric. Last shell... last man... last foot of ground... last breath...” [2] 
It soon became apparent that the Army of Northern Virginia, under Lee’s command, had decided to concentrate its attack on the Union’s southern flank, this second day of battle. Not only was Lee an competent tactician, he knew many of the officers in blue on the ridgeline opposite of his position, for Lee was a former superintendent of the United States Military Academy at West Point. [3] Numerous Confederate attacks by General John Bell Hood’s Texas Brigade, failed to overcome Chamberlain’s defenses, but by about 5:00 PM the 20th Maine was dangerously low on ammunition.
Actions Answer the Rhetorical Question
Although the actual events of the July 3rd battle will only be eternally known by those members of the 20th Maine, the wounded Chamberlain ordered the regiment to fix bayonets at about 5:15 PM. The act of “fixing bayonets” (affixing a bayonet to the end of a rifle), implied an intent to charge. With the simple preparatory command, “Bayonets,” and command of execution, “Charge,” the regiment rushed headlong down the incline right into the heart of Hood’s brigade. In the aftermath, the 20th Maine had killed or captured the vast majority of Hood’s brigade and guarded them with empty rifles.
Having already extended his thinly held lines, it would appear that Chamberlain had answered his own rhetorical question and help until the last everything, “Last shell... last man... last foot of ground... last breath...” For his actions that day, Chamberlain was awarded the Congressional Medal of Honor. The regiment’s Color (Flag) Sergeant, Andrew J. Tozier of the 2nd Maine (one of the would-be deserters mentioned below), quickly emerged as an unlikely hero, and he was later awarded the Medal of Honor for his bravery—the unarmed color bearer went wherever the colonel led him.
Two days prior, Chamberlain (Jeff Daniels), speaking to a group of deserters from the 2nd Maine, Chamberlain (Daniels) spoke these words:
“This is a different kind of army. If you look back through history you will see men fighting for pay, for women, for some other kind of loot. They fight for land, power, because a king leads them, or just because they like killing. But we are here for something new, this has not happened much, in the history of the world. We are an army out to set other men free. America should be free ground, all of it, not divided by a line between slave states and free – all the way from here to the Pacific Ocean. No man has to bow. No man born to royalty. Here we judge you by what you do, not by who your father was. Here you can be something. Here is the place to build a home. But it's not the land, there's always more land. It's the idea that we all have value - you and me. What we are fighting for, in the end, we're fighting for each other.” [2]
Though, Lee’s southern army would continue to fight on July 4th, 1863, its fate was sealed at this small hill in southern Pennsylvania, giving the North its first decisive victory. [4] This was a victory that Abraham Lincoln had waited on since April 1861 at the outset of war. Having issued the Emancipation Proclamation on January 1, 1963, Lincoln had yet to see a Union victory. [5]
A Courthouse at Appomattox
Chamberlain would continue to fight until he was mortally wounded [6] at the Battle of Petersburg, just south of the Confederate capitol at Richmond, VA. For his actions throughout the war, General Ulysses Grant selected Major General Joshua Lawrence Chamberlain to receive the Confederate surrender at Appomattox Courthouse, on April 9th, 1865. [7]
After the war, Chamberlain returned to Bowdoin College as a Professor of Rhetoric. He later served as the President of Bowdoin and three-time governor of Maine. At the age of 85, Chamberlain died of his lingering wartime wounds on February 4th, 1914, at Portland, Maine.
The Aftermath of Rhetoric
“All that is necessary for the triumph of evil is that good men do nothing.” ― Edmund Burke 
Perhaps rhetoric, as an art, died with passing of time. Few students will hear the term “rhetoric” in the college careers, and the term “Political rhetoric” does not encapsulate true rhetoric, as political rhetoric is seldom effective. In the scheme of things, the aftermath of rhetoric is action, and for Chamberlain, a bold one.
Works Cited and Notes
1.	By the time Chamberlain had taken command of the 20th Maine in 1863, Abraham Lincoln had already drafted the Emancipation Proclamation in the telegraph officer across the street from the White House. He was waiting for a decisive Union Victory to make it official. 
2.	Gettysburg (1993) on IMDb, www.imdb.com/title/tt0107007/quotes 
3.	The quarters of the Superintendent of the United States Military Academy at Wet Point, NY, housed portraits of all its former and present Superintendents. Among these is a portrait of Robert E. Lee in a Federal blue uniform, the only one known to exist. I have seen it in person.
4.	While General George Gordon Meade was defeating Lee’s Army of Norther Virginia, General U.S. Grant was capturing the fortress at Vicksburg, MS, thus sealing off the strategic Mississippi River from the Confederacy.
5.	The stalemate between Union and Confederate forces at Battle of Antietam, near Sharpsburg, Maryland, on September 17, 1862, seemed to Lincoln as close to an Union victory as he might ever see. He used the occasion to issue an Emancipation Proclamation on January 1, 1863, a year and a half before victory in battle would actually be delivered.
6.	The definition of mortal wound is one that is likely to cause death. For Chamberlain, death did not visit for quite a while.
7.	Some historians dispute these events at Appomattox Courthouse, claiming that Chamberlain was not given the honor to receive the Confederate surrender.