Confessions of a Career Consultant
Recently, a recruiter at Facebook informed me that I did not have enough consulting experience to work in one of their data science positions. I began to reflect on her analysis.
Cognitive Semantics
Have you ever told someone (your customer, souse, children, colleague) something that was intended as good and taken as bad? Was it a matter of poor communication or between their conception of the real world versus yours? If you say differential analysis to a medical professional, they will think about ruling out signs and symptoms of various diseases or conditions to reach a possible diagnosis. If you talk about differential analysis with a mathematician, they will most like think about how study the change of quantities over time. Same term—different meaning in different contexts.
Could the Facebook recruiter have been thinking about something different than my conception of consulting?
Little Word, Broad Application
Consultant. Consultant? The formal definition is, “a person who provides expert advice professionally.” It is derived from the Latin word, consulatare, “to deliberate.” A consultant is usually an expert or an experienced professional in a specific field, such as data analytics, and has a wide knowledge of the subject matter. An internal consultant is someone who operates within an organization but is available to be consulted on areas of their specialization by other departments or individuals (acting as clients). I confess, I only did this for about 15 years.
In contrast, an external consultant is someone who is employed externally to the client (either by a consulting firm or some other agency) whose expertise is provided on a temporary basis, usually for a fee. Consulting firms range in size from sole proprietorships consisting of a single consultant (like Simulation Educators), small businesses consisting of a small number of consultants (like Clarity Insights), to mid-to large consulting firms, which in some cases are multinational corporations. This type of consultant generally engages with multiple and changing clients, which are typically companies, non-profit organizations, governments, or military. I confess, I only did this for about 15 years.
Fast-Pace Environments
Apparently, the data analytics world at Facebook is a fast-pace environment. It was obvious to the recruiter that I would not be able to work in such a fast pace environment, telling me so after I was coming off of a twelve-hour volunteer shift with AMR (American Medical Response), as an Emergency Medical Technician candidate, on top of working full-time and going to school-full time. Of course, I have to confess (since this is an article about confessions), this is a much slower pace than the one I experienced as a career active duty Army officer. I confess, I am not sure I could handle the Facebook pressure!