MECHANICS 
OF FLIGHT 
A. C. KERMODE 
MECHANICS 
OF FLIGHT 
11th Edition 
Revised by 
R.H. BARNARD & D.R. PHILPOTT 
11th Edition 
Mechanics of Flight 
We work with leading authors to develop the 
strongest educational materials in aerodynamics, 
bringing cutting-edge thinking and best 
learning practice to a global market. 
Under a range of well-known imprints, including 
Prentice Hall, we craft high quality print and 
electronic publications which help readers to understand 
and apply their content, whether studying or at work. 
To find out more about the complete range of our 
publishing, please visit us on the World Wide Web at: 
www.pearsoned.co.uk 
11th EDITION 
A. C. KERMODE CBE, MA, CEng, FRAeS 
Revised by 
R. H. BARNARD PhD, CEng, FRAeS 
and D. R. PHILPOTT PhD, CEng, MRAes, MAIAA 
Mechanics of Flight 
Pearson Education Limited 
Edinburgh Gate 
Harlow 
Essex CM20 2JE 
England 
and Associated Companies throughout the world 
Visit us on the World Wide Web at: 
www.pearsoned.co.uk 
First published by Pitman Books Ltd 
Tenth edition published 1996 
Eleventh edition 2006 
© A. C. Kermode 1972 
© Pearson Education Limited 2006 
All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval system, 
or transmitted in any form or by any means, electronic, mechanical, photocopying, recording, 
or otherwise without either the prior written permission of the Publishers or a licence permitting 
restricted copying in the United Kingdom issued by the Copyright Licensing Agency Ltd, 90 
Tottenham Court Road, London W1T 4LP. 
ISBN--13: 978--1--4058--2359--3 
ISBN--10: 1--4058--2359--3 
British Library Cataloguing-in Publication Data 
A catalogue record for this book is available from the British Library 
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data 
Kermode, Alfred Cotterill. 
Mechanics of flight / A. C. Kermode; rev. and edited by R. H. Barnard and D. R. 
Philpott.-- 11th ed. 
p. cm. 
Includes bibliographical references and index. 
ISBN 1-4058-2359-3 (paperback : alk. paper) 
1. Aerodynamics. 2. Flight. I. Barnard, R. H. II. Philpott, D. R. III. Title 
TL570.K43 2006 
629.132--dc22 
2006041555 
10987654321 
1009080706 
Typeset in 10/12pt Sabon by 3 
Printed and bound in China 
The publisher's policy is to use paper manufactured from sustainable forests. 
Preface to Eleventh Edition 
vi 
Acknowledgements 
vii 
Chapter 1 Mechanics 
1 
Chapter 2 Air and airflow -- subsonic speeds 
28 
Chapter 3 Aerofoils -- subsonic speeds 
67 
Chapter 4 Thrust 
120 
Chapter 5 Level flight 
147 
Chapter 6 Gliding and landing 
180 
Chapter 7 Performance 
215 
Chapter 8 Manoeuvres 
230 
Chapter 9 Stability and control 
257 
Chapter 10 A trial flight 
287 
Chapter 11 Flight at transonic speeds 
297 
Chapter 12 Flight at supersonic speeds 
342 
Chapter 13 Space flight 
377 
Appendixes 
1 Aerofoil data 
412 
2 Scale effect and Reynolds Number 
431 
3 Numerical questions 
435 
4 Answers to numerical questions 
471 
5 Answers to non-numerical questions 
479 
Index 
491 
Contents 
The lasting popularity of this classic book is aptly demonstrated by the fact 
that this is the eleventh edition. This is also the third time that the current 
reviewers have undertaken the task of updating it, and we hope that the 
changes will be as well received this time as previously. 
It would be unreasonable to try to include details of all recent develop- 
ments, and furthermore, we wanted to retain as much as possible of the 
practical detail that Kermode supplied. This detail nowadays relates mostly to 
light general aviation and initial training aircraft, of the type that will be 
encountered by anyone who wishes to learn to fly. However, transonic, super- 
sonic and even space flight are given their place. 
The late A. C. Kermode was a high-ranking Royal Air Force officer respon- 
sible for training. He also had a vast accumulation of practical aeronautical 
experience, both in the air and on the ground. It is this direct knowledge that 
provided the strength and authority of his book. 
Most chapters have some simple non-numerical questions that are intended 
to test students' undertstanding, and our answers to these are provided. There 
are also numerical questions and solutions for each chapter. For engineering 
and basic scientific questions we have used the SI unit system, but aircraft 
operations are an international subject, and anyone involved in the practical 
business will need to be familiar with the fact that heights are always given in 
feet, and speeds in knots. We have therefore retained several appropriate qes- 
tions where these units are involved. 
R. H. Barnard 
D. R. Philpott 
Preface to eleventh edition 
We are grateful to the following for permission to reproduce copyright 
material: 
Figures 1B, 2G, 2E, 8D courtesy of the Lockheed Aircraft Corporation, USA; 
Figures 2B, 2C, 3A, 3B, 6B, 11B, 12D courtesy of the former British Aircraft 
Corporation; Figures 3C, 6E, 9F, 13B courtesy of General Dynamics 
Corporation, USA; Figure 3D courtesy of Paul MacCready; Figures 3E, 5H 
courtesy of the Grumman Corporation, USA; Figure 3F courtesy of Fiat 
Aviazione, Torino, Italy; Figures 4D, 13D, courtesy of the Bell Aerospace 
Division of Textron Inc., USA; Figure 4G courtesy of Beech Aircraft 
Corporation, USA; Figures 4H, 5B courtesy of Cessna Aircraft Company, 
USA; Figure 4I courtesy of the former Fairey Aviation Co. Ltd; Figures 5C, 8C 
courtesy of Flight; Figure 6A courtesy of Slingsby Sailplanes Ltd; Figure 6C 
(bottom) courtesy of Terry Shwetz, de Havilland, Canada; Figure 6F courtesy 
of Bell Helicopter Textron; Figure 6G courtesy of Nigel Cogger; Figures 7C, 
13C courtesy of the Boeing Company; Figure 9H courtesy of SAAB, Sweden; 
Figure 9I courtesy of Piaggio, Genoa, Italy; Figure 11A courtesy of the Shell 
Petroleum Co. Ltd; Figure 11E courtesy of McDonnell Douglas Corporation, 
USA; Figure 12A courtesy of the Lockheed-California Company, USA; Figure 
12B courtesy of British Aerospace Defence Ltd, Military Aircraft Division; 
Figure 12C courtesy of Avions Marcel Dassault, France; Figures 13A, 13E 
courtesy of NASA. 
Quotation from The Stars in their Courses on p.391 (Sir James Jeans) 
reprinted courtesy of Cambridge University Press. 
Acknowledgements 
Flying and mechanics 
The flight and manoeuvres of an aeroplane provide glorious examples of the 
principles of mechanics. However, this is not a book on mechanics. It is about 
flying, and is an attempt to explain the flight of an aeroplane in a simple and 
interesting way; the mechanics are only brought in as an aid to understanding. 
In the opening chapter I shall try to sum up some of the principles with which 
we are most concerned in flying. 
Force, and the first law of motion 
An important principle of mechanics is that any object that is at rest will stay 
at rest unless acted upon by some force, and any object that is moving will 
continue moving at a steady speed unless acted upon by a force. This state- 
ment is in effect a simple statement of what is known as Newton's First Law 
of Motion. 
There are two types of forces that can act on a body. They are: 
(1) externally applied mechanical forces such as a simple push or pull 
(2) the so-called body forces such as those caused by the attraction of gravity 
and electromagnetic and electrostatic fields. 
External forces relevant to the mechanics of flight include the thrust produced 
by a jet engine or a propeller, and the drag resistance produced by movement 
through the air. A less obvious external force is that of reaction. A simple 
example of a reactive force is that which occurs when an object is placed on a 
fixed surface. The table produces an upward reactive force that exactly balances 
Mechanics 
CHAPTER1 
the weight. The only body force that is of interest in the mechanics of flight is 
the force due to the attraction of gravity, which we know simply as the weight 
of the object. 
Forces (of whatever type) are measured in the units of newtons (N) in the 
metric SI system or pounds force (lbf) in the Imperial or Federal systems. In 
this book, both sets of units are used in the examples and questions. 
Mass 
The mass of an object can be loosely described as the quantity of matter in it. 
The greater the mass of an object, the greater will be the force required to start 
it moving from rest or to change its speed if it is already moving. 
Mass is measured in units of kilograms (kg) in the SI metric system or 
pounds (lb) in the Imperial and Federal systems. Unfortunately, the same 
names are commonly used for the units of weight (which is a force), and this 
causes a great deal of confusion, as will be explained a little later under the 
heading Units. In this book, we will always use kilograms for mass, and 
newtons for weight. 
Momentum 
The quantity that decides the difficulty in stopping a body is its momentum, 
which is the product of its mass and the velocity of movement. 
A body having a 20 kg mass moving at 2 m/s has a momentum of 40 kg m/s, 
and so does a body having a 10 kg mass moving at 4 m/s. The first has the 
greater mass, the second the greater velocity, but both are equally difficult to 
stop. A car has a larger mass than a bullet, but a relatively low velocity. A 
bullet has a much lower mass, but a relatively high velocity. Both are difficult 
to stop, and both can do considerable damage to anything that tries to stop 
them quickly. 
To change the momentum of a body or even a mass of air, it is necessary to 
apply a force. Force Rate of change of momentum. 
Forces in equilibrium 
If two tug-of-war teams pulling on a rope are well matched, there may for a 
while be no movement, just a lot of shouting and puffing! Both teams are 
exerting the same amount of force on the two ends of the rope. The forces are 
therefore in equilibrium and there is no change of momentum. There are, 
2 MECHANICS OF FLIGHT 
however, other more common occurrences of forces in equilibrium. If you 
push down on an object at rest on a table, the table will resist the force with 
an equal and opposite force of reaction, so the forces are in equilibrium. Of 
course, if you press too hard, the table might break, in which case the forces 
will no longer be in equilibrium, and a sudden and unwanted acceleration will 
occur. 
As another example, consider a glider being towed behind a small aircraft 
as in Fig. 1.1. If the aircraft and glider are flying straight and level at constant 
speed, then the pulling force exerted by the aircraft on the tow-rope must be 
exactly balanced by an equal and opposite aerodynamic resistance or drag 
force acting on the glider. The forces are in equilibrium. 
Some people find it hard to believe that these forces really are exactly 
equal. Surely, they say, the aircraft must be pulling forward just a bit harder 
than the glider is pulling backwards; otherwise, what makes them go 
forward? Well, what makes them go forward is the fact that they are going 
forward, and the law says that they will continue to do so unless there is 
something to alter that state of affairs. If the forces are balanced then there is 
nothing to alter that state of equilibrium, and the aircraft and glider will keep 
moving at a constant speed. 
Forces not in equilibrium 
In the case of the glider mentioned above, what would happen if the pilot of 
the towing aircraft suddenly opened the engine throttle? The pulling force on 
the tow-rope would increase, but at first the aerodynamic resistance on the 
glider would not change. The forces would therefore no longer be in equilib- 
rium. The air resistance force is still there of course, so some of the pull on the 
tow-rope must go into overcoming it, but the remainder of the force will cause 
the glider to accelerate as shown in Fig. 1.2 (overleaf), which is called a free- 
body diagram. 
This brings us to Newton's second law, which says in effect that if the forces 
are not in balance, then the acceleration will be proportional to force and 
inversely proportional to the mass of the object: 
a F/m 
3 
MECHANICS 
Pull applied 
by towing 
aircraft 
1000 N 
Aerodynamic 
resistance 
force 
1000 N 
Fig 1.1 Forces in equilibrium 
where a is the acceleration, m is the mass of the body, and F is the force. This 
relationship is more familiarly written as: 
F m a 
Inertia forces 
In the above example, of the accelerating glider, the force applied to one end 
of the rope by the aircraft is greater than the air resistance acting on the glider 
at the other end. As far as the rope is concerned, however, the force it must 
apply to the glider tow-hook must be equal to the air resistance force plus the 
force required to accelerate the glider. In other words, the forces on the two 
ends of the rope are in equilibrium (as long as we ignore the mass of the rope). 
The extra force that the rope has to apply to produce the acceleration is called 
an inertia force. 
As far as the rope is concerned, it does not matter whether the force at its 
far end is caused by tying it to a wall to create a reaction or by attaching it to 
a glider which it is causing to accelerate, the effect is the same -- it feels an 
equal and opposite pull at the two ends. From the point of view of the glider, 
however, the situation is very different; if there were a force equal and oppo- 
site to the pull from the rope, no acceleration would take place. The forces on 
the glider are not in equilibrium. 
Great care has to be taken in applying the concept of an inertia force. When 
considering the stresses in the tow-rope it is acceptable to apply the pulling 
force at one end, and an equal and opposite force at the other end due to the 
air resistance plus the inertia of the object that it is causing to accelerate. When 
considering the motion of the aircraft and glider, however, no balancing inertia 
force should be included, or there would be no acceleration. A free-body 
diagram should be drawn as in Fig. 1.2. 
This brings us to the much misunderstood third law of Newton: to every 
action there is an equal and opposite reaction. If a book rests on a table 
then the table produces a reaction force that is equal and opposite to the 
weight force. However, be careful; the force which is accelerating the glider 
produces a reaction, but the reaction is not a force, but an acceleration of 
the glider. 
4 MECHANICS OF FLIGHT 
Pull applied 
by towing 
aircraft 
1200 N 
Aerodynamic 
resistance 
force 
1000 N 
Fig 1.2 Forces not in equilibrium 
Weight 
There is one particular force that we are all familiar with; it is known as the 
force due to gravity. We all know that any object placed near the earth is 
attracted towards it. What is perhaps less well known is that this is a mutual 
attraction like magnetism. The earth is attracted towards the object with just 
as great a force as the object is attracted towards the earth. 
All objects are mutually attracted towards each other. The force depends on 
the masses of the two bodies and the distance between them, and is given by 
the expression: 
F 
where G is a constant which has the value 6.67 10 11 N m2/kg2, m1 and m2 
are the masses of the two objects, and d is the distance between them. Using 
the above formula you can easily calculate the force of attraction between two 
one kilogram masses placed one metre apart. You will see that it is very small. 
If one of the masses is the earth, however, the force of attraction becomes 
large, and it is this force that we call the force of gravity. In most practical 
problems in aeronautics, the objects that we consider will be on or relatively 
close to the surface of the earth, so the distance d is constant, and as the mass 
of the earth is also constant, we can reduce the formula above to a simpler one: 
F m g 
Gm1m2 
d2 
5 
MECHANICS 
Fig 1A Weight and thrust The massive Antonov An-255 Mriya, with a 
maximum take-off weight of 5886 kN (600 tonnes). The six Soloviev D- 
18T turbofans deliver a total maximum thrust of 1377 kN. 
where m is the mass of the object and g is a constant called the gravity con- 
stant which takes account of the mass of the earth and its radius. It has the 
value 9.81 m/s2 in the SI system, or 32 ft/s2 in the Imperial or Federal systems. 
The force in the above expression is what we know as weight. Weight is the 
force with which an object is attracted towards the centre of the earth. In fact 
g is not really a constant because the earth is not an exact sphere, and large 
chunks of very dense rock near the surface can cause the force of attraction to 
increase slightly locally. For most practical aeronautical calculations we can 
ignore such niceties. We cannot, however, use this simple formula once we 
start looking at spacecraft or high-altitude missiles. 
Weight is an example of what is known as a body force. Body forces unlike 
mechanical forces have no visible direct means of application. Other examples 
of body forces are electrostatic and electromagnetic forces. 
When an aircraft is in steady level flight, there are two vertical forces acting 
on it, as shown in Fig. 1.3. There is an externally applied force, the lift force 
provided by the air flowing over the wing, and a body force, the weight. 
The acceleration due to gravity 
All objects near the surface of the earth have the force of gravity acting on 
them. If there is no opposing force, then they will start to move, to accelerate. 
The rate at which they accelerate is independent of their mass. 
The force due to gravity (weight) F m g 
but, from Newton's second law, F m acceleration 
By equating the two expressions above, we can see that the acceleration due 
to gravity will be numerically equal to the gravity constant g, and will be inde- 
pendent of the mass. Not surprisingly, many people confuse the two terms 
'gravity constant' and 'acceleration due to gravity', and think that they are the 
same thing. The numerical value is the same, but they are different things. If a 
book rests on a table, then the weight is given by the product of the gravity 
6 MECHANICS OF FLIGHT 
Lift force due to air flow 
over wings 
Body force (weight) 
Fig 1.3 Aerodynamic and body forces 
constant and the mass, but it is not accelerating. If it falls off the table, it will 
then accelerate at a rate equal to the value of the gravity constant. 
This brings us to the old problem of the feather and the lump of lead; which 
will fall fastest? Well, the answer is that in the vacuum of space, they would 
both fall at the same rate. In the atmosphere, however, the feather would be 
subjected to a much larger aerodynamic resistance force in relation to the 
accelerating gravity force (the weight), and therefore the feather would fall 
more slowly. 
For all objects falling through the atmosphere, there is a speed at which the 
aerodynamic resistance is equal to the weight, so they will then cease to accel- 
erate. This speed is called the terminal velocity and will depend on the shape, 
the density and the orientation of the object. A man will fall faster head first 
than if he can fall flat. Free-fall sky-divers use this latter effect to control their 
rate of descent in free fall. 
Mass weight and g 
The mass of a body depends on the amount of matter in it, and it will not vary 
with its position on the earth, nor will it be any different if we place it on the 
moon. The weight (the force due to gravity) will change, however, because the 
so-called gravity constant will be different on the moon, due to the smaller 
mass of the moon, and will even vary slightly between different points on the 
earth. Also, therefore, the rate at which a falling object accelerates will be dif- 
ferent. On the moon it will fall noticeably slower, as can be observed in the 
apparently slow-motion moon-walking antics of the Apollo astronauts. 
Units 
The system of units that we use to measure quantities, feet, metres, etc., can 
be a great source of confusion. In European educational establishments and 
most of its industry, a special form of the metric system known as the Système 
International or SI is now in general use. The basic units of this system are the 
kilogram for mass (not weight) (kg), the metre for distance (m) and the second 
for time (s). 
Temperatures are in degrees Celsius (or Centigrade) (°C) when measured 
relative to the freezing point of water, or in Kelvin (K) when measured relative 
to absolute zero; 0°C is equivalent to 273 K. A temperature change of one 
degree Centigrade is exactly the same as a change of one degree Kelvin, it is 
just the starting or zero point that is different. Note that the degree symbol ° 
is not used when temperatures are written in degrees Kelvin, for example we 
write 273 K. 
7 
MECHANICS 
Forces and hence weights are in newtons (N) not kilograms. Beware of 
weights quoted in kilograms; in the old (pre-SI) metric system still commonly 
used in parts of Europe, the name kilogram was also used for weight or force. 
To convert weights given in kilograms to newtons, simply multiply by 9.81. 
The SI system is known as a coherent system, which effectively means that 
you can put the values into formulae without having to worry about conver- 
sion factors. For example, in the expression relating force to mass and 
acceleration: F m a, we find that a force of 1 newton acting on a mass of 
1 kilogram produces an acceleration of 1 m/s2. Contrast this with a version of 
the old British 'Imperial' system where a force of 1 pound acting on a mass of 
1 pound produces an acceleration of 32.18 ft/sec2. You can imagine the prob- 
lems that the latter system produces. Notice how in this system, the same 
name, the pound, is used for two different things, force and mass. 
Because aviation is dominated by American influence, American Federal 
units and the similar Imperial (British) units are still in widespread use. Apart 
from the problem of having no internationally agreed standard, the use of 
Federal or Imperial units can cause confusion, because there are several 
alternative units within the system. In particular, there are two alternative 
units for mass, the pound mass, and the slug (which is equivalent to 32.18 
pounds mass). The slug may be unfamiliar to most readers, but it is commonly 
used in aeronautical engineering because, as with the SI units, it produces a 
coherent system. A force of 1 pound acting on a mass of one slug produces an 
acceleration of 1 ft/sec2. The other two basic units in this system are, as you 
may have noticed, the foot and the second. Temperatures are measured in 
degrees Fahrenheit. 
You may find all this rather confusing, but to make matters worse, in order 
to avoid dangerous mistakes, international navigation and aircraft operations 
conventions use the foot for altitude, and the knot for speed. The knot is a 
nautical mile per hour (0.5145 m/s). A nautical mile is longer than a land mile, 
being 6080 feet instead of 5280 feet. Just to add a final blow, baggage is nor- 
mally weighed in kilograms (not even newtons)! 
To help the reader, most of the problems and examples in this book are 
in SI units. If you are presented with unfamiliar units or mixtures of units, 
convert them to SI units first, and then work in SI units. One final tip is 
that when working out problems, it is always better to use basic units, so 
convert millimetres or kilometres to metres before applying any formulae. 
In the real world of aviation, you will have to get used to dealing with 
other units such as slugs and knots, but let us take one step at a time. 
Below, we give a simple example of a calculation using SI units (see 
Example 1.1). 
EXAMPLE 1.1 
The mass of an aeroplane is 2000 kg. What force, in addition to that required 
to overcome friction and air resistance, will be needed to give it an accelera- 
tion of 2 m/s2 during take-off? 
8 MECHANICS OF FLIGHT 
SOLUTION 
Force ma 
 2000 2 
4000 newtons 
This shows how easy is the solution of such problems if we use the SI units. 
Many numerical examples on the relationship between forces and masses 
involve also the principles of simple kinematics, and the reader who is not 
familiar with these should read the next paragraph before he tackles the 
examples. 
Kinematics 
It will help us in working examples if we summarise the relations which apply 
in kinematics, that is, the study of the movement of bodies irrespective of the 
forces acting upon them. 
We shall consider only the two simple cases, those of uniform velocity and 
uniform acceleration. 
Symbols and units will be as follows -- 
Time t (sec) 
Distance s (metres) 
Velocity (initial) u (metres per sec) 
Velocity (final) v (metres per sec) 
Acceleration a (metres per sec per sec) 
Uniform velocity 
If velocity is uniform at u metres per sec clearly 
Distance travelled Velocity Time 
ors ut 
Uniform acceleration 
Final velocity Initial velocity Increase of velocity 
orv u at 
Distance travelled Initial velocity Time 
Acceleration Time squared 
12 
9 
MECHANICS 
i.e.s ut at2 
Final velocity squared Initial velocity squared 
2 Acceleration Distance 
orv2 u2 2as 
With the aid of these simple formulae -- all of which are founded on first prin- 
ciples -- it is easy to work out problems of uniform velocity or uniform 
acceleration (see Examples 1.2 to 1.4). 
EXAMPLE 1.2 
If, during a take-off run an aeroplane starting from rest attains a velocity of 
90 km/h in 10 seconds, what is the average acceleration? 
SOLUTION 
Initial velocity u 0 
Final velocity v 90 km/h 25 m/s 
Timet 10sec 
a ? 
Since we are concerned with u, v, t and a, we use the formula 
v u at 
25 0 10a 
a  25/10 2.5m/s2 
EXAMPLE 1.3 
How far will the aeroplane of the previous example have travelled during the 
take-off run? 
SOLUTION 
u 0,v 25m/s,t 10sec,a 2.5m/s2 
To find s, we can either use the formula 
Final velocity squared Initial velocity squared 
2 Acceleration Distance 
s ut at2 
 0  
2.5 102 
 125m 
orv2 u2 2as 
25 25 0 2 2.5 s 
 s  (25 25)/(2 2.5) 
 125m 
12 
12 
12 
10 MECHANICS OF FLIGHT 
EXAMPLE 1.4 
A bomb is dropped from an aeroplane which is in level flight at 200 knots at 
a height of 3500 m. Neglecting the effect of air resistance, how long will it be 
before the bomb strikes the ground, and how far horizontally before the target 
must the bomb be released? 
SOLUTION 
To find the time of fall we are concerned only with the vertical velocity, which 
was zero at release. 
 u 0 
a acceleration of gravity 9.81 m/s2 
s vertical distance from aeroplane to ground 3500 m 
t ? 
We need the formula connecting u, a, s and t, i.e. 
s ut at2 
 3500 0  
9.81 t2 
 t2  (3500/9.81) 2 713 
t 27 sec (approx) 
Since we are neglecting the effect of air resistance, the horizontal velocity of 
the bomb will, throughout the fall, remain the same as it was at the moment 
of release, i.e. the same as the velocity of the aeroplane, namely 200 knots or, 
converting into metres per second, (200 1852)/3600 103 m/s (approx). 
Therefore the distance that the bomb will travel forward during the falling 
timeof27swillbe103 27 2781m. 
This, of course, is the distance before the target that the bomb must be 
released. 
Note that in Example 1.4 we have neglected air resistance. Since we are 
interested in flying this may seem rather a silly thing to do, because we are only 
able to fly by making use of the same principles that are responsible for air 
resistance. In fact, too, the effects of air resistance on bombs are of vital 
importance and are always taken into account when bombing. But it is better 
to learn things in their most simple form first, then gradually to add the com- 
plications. As these complications are added we get nearer and nearer to the 
truth, but if we are faced with them all at once the picture becomes blurred 
and the fundamental principles involved fail to stand out clearly. 
Other examples on kinematics will be found in Appendix 3, and the reader 
who is not familiar with examples of this type is advised to work through 
them. 
12 
12 
11 
MECHANICS 
Motion on curved paths 
It has already been emphasised that bodies tend to continue in the same state 
of motion, and that this involves direction as well as speed. It is clear, there- 
fore, that if we wish to make a body change its motion by turning a corner or 
travelling on a curved path, we must apply a force to it in order to make it do 
so, and that this will apply even if the speed of the body does not change. This 
is a force exactly similar to the one that is required to accelerate an aircraft, 
that is to say: the force must be proportional to the mass of the body and to 
the acceleration which it is desired to produce. But what is the acceleration of 
a body that is going round a corner? Is there, in fact, any acceleration at all if 
the speed remains constant? And in what direction is the acceleration? 
Let us deal with the last question first. There is another part of Newton's 
second law which has not so far been mentioned, namely that the rate of 
change of momentum of the body will be in the direction of the applied force. 
If the mass of the body does not change as it goes round the corner the accel- 
eration must be in the direction of the force. But is there any acceleration if the 
speed does not change? Yes -- because velocity is what we call a vector quan- 
tity, that is to say, it has both magnitude and direction, while speed has only 
magnitude. Thus if the direction of motion changes, the velocity changes even 
though the speed remains unaltered. But at what rate does the velocity change? 
-- in other words, what is the acceleration? and in what direction is it? 
Centripetal force and centripetal acceleration 
We all know the direction of the force as a result of practical experience. Swing 
a stone round on the end of a piece of string. In what direction does the string 
pull on the stone to keep it on its circular path? Why, towards the centre of 
the circle, of course, and since force and acceleration are in the same direction, 
the acceleration must also be towards the centre. 
We know too that the greater the velocity of the stone, and the smaller the 
radius of the circle on which it travels, the greater is the pull in the string, and 
therefore the greater the acceleration. The acceleration is actually given by the 
simple formula v2/r, where v is the velocity of the body and r the radius of the 
circle. 
The force towards the centre is called centripetal force (centre-seeking 
force), and will be equal to the mass of the body the centripetal accelera- 
tion, i.e. to m v2/r (Fig. 1.4). 
We have made no attempt to prove that the acceleration is v2/r -- the proof 
will be found in any textbook on mechanics -- but since it is not easy to con- 
ceive of an acceleration towards the centre as so many metres per second per 
second when the body never gets any nearer to the centre, it may help if we 
12 MECHANICS OF FLIGHT 
translate the algebraic expression into some actual figures. Taking the simple 
example of a stone on the end of a piece of string, if the stone is whirled round 
so as to make one revolution per second, and the length of the string is 1 
metre, the distance travelled by the stone per second will be 2 r, i.e. 2  1 
or 6.28 m. Therefore 
v 6.28m/s,r 1m 
acceleration towards centre v2/r 
(6.28 6.28)/1 
39.5 m/s2 (approx) 
Notice that this is nearly four times the acceleration of gravity, or nearly 4g. 
Since we are only using this example as an illustration of principles, let us sim- 
plify matters by assuming that the answer is 4g, i.e. 39.24 m/s2. 
This means that the velocity of the stone towards the centre is changing 
at a rate 4 times as great as that of a falling body. Yet it never gets any 
nearer to the centre! No, but what would have happened to the stone if it 
had not been attached to the string? It would have obeyed the tendency to 
go straight on, and in so doing would have departed farther and farther 
from the centre. 
What centripetal force will be required to produce this acceleration of 4g? 
The mass of the stone 4g. 
So, if the mass is 1/2 kg, the centripetal force will be 1/2 4g 2 9.81 
19.62, say 20 newtons. 
Therefore the pull in the string is 20 N in order to give the mass of 1/2 kg 
an acceleration of 4g. 
Notice that the force is 20 newtons, the acceleration is 4 g. There is a hor- 
rible tendency to talk about 'g' as if it were a force; it is not, it is an 
acceleration. 
13 
MECHANICS 
Direction of 
rotation 
Velocity, v 
Centripetal
force
r 
mv2 
r 
Fig 1.4 Centripetal force 
Now this is all very easy provided the centripetal force is the only force 
acting upon the mass of the stone. However, in reality there must be a force of 
gravity acting upon it. 
If the stone is rotating in a horizontal circle its weight will act at right angles 
to the pull in the string, and so will not affect the centripetal force. But of 
course a stone cannot rotate in a horizontal circle, with the string also hori- 
zontal, unless there is something to support it. So let us imagine the mass to 
be on a table -- but it will have to be a smooth, frictionless table or we shall 
introduce yet more forces. We now have the simple state of affairs illustrated 
in Fig. 1.5. 
Now suppose that we rotate the stone in a vertical circle, like an aeroplane 
looping the loop, the situation is rather different (Fig. 1.6). Even if the stone 
were not rotating, but just hanging on the end of the string, there would be a 
tension in the string, due to its weight, and this as near as matters would be 
very roughly 5 newtons, for a mass of 1/2 kg. If it must rotate with an accel- 
eration of 4g the string must also provide a centripetal force of 20 newtons. 
So when the stone is at the bottom of the circle, D, the total pull in the string 
will be 25 N. When the stone is in the top position, C, its own weight will act 
towards the centre and this will provide 5 N, so the string need only pull with 
an additional 15 N to produce the total of 20 N for the acceleration of 4g. At 
the side positions, A and B, the weight of the stone acts at right angles to the 
string and the pull in the string will be 20 N. 
To sum up: the pull in the string varies between 15 N and 25 N, but the 
acceleration is all the time 4g and, of course, the centripetal force is all the time 
 20 N. From the practical point of view, what matters most is the pull in the 
string, which is obviously most likely to break when the stone is in position D 
and the tension is at the maximum value of 25 N. 
To complicate the issue somewhat, suppose the stone rotates in a horizontal 
circle, but relies on the pull of the string to hold it up (Fig. 1.7), and that the 
string has been lengthened so that the radius on which the stone is rotating is 
14 MECHANICS OF FLIGHT 
Direction of 
rotation 
Force 20 N Force 20 N 
Force 20 N
Force
20N
Accel. 
4g 
Accel.
4g
Accel.
4g
Accel. 
4g 
Fig 1.5 Stone rotating in a horizontal circle, supported on a table 
still 1 metre. The string cannot of course be horizontal since the pull in it must 
do two things -- support the weight of the stone and provide the centripetal 
force. 
Here we must introduce a new principle. 
A force of 5 N, vertically, is required to support the weight. 
A force of 20 N, horizontally, is required to provide the centripetal force. 
Now five plus twenty does not always make twenty-five! It does not in this 
example, and for the simple reason that they are not pulling in the same direc- 
tion. We must therefore represent them by vectors (Fig. 1.7), and the diagonal 
will represent the total force which, by Pythagoras' Theorem, will be 
 (202  52)  425 20.6N 
The tangent of the angle of the string to the vertical will be 20/5 4.0. So the 
angle will be approx 76°. Expressing the angle,  , in symbols -- 
tan 
 (m v2/r)/W 
(m v2/r)/mg 
Centripetal force 
Weight 
15 
MECHANICS 
Direction of 
rotation 
Tension 
20N 
Accel. 
4g 
Accel. 
4g 
Accel.
4g
Accel.
4g
Tension 
20N 
Tension 25 N Tension 15 N
Weight 
5N 
Weight 
5N 
Weight 
5N 
Weight 5 N 
B 
A 
C 
D 
Fig 1.6 Stone rotating in a vertical circle 
Tension 20.6 N 
Weight 5 N 
Weight 5 N 
20N 
5N 
1m 
76° 
Fig 1.7 Stone rotating in a horizontal circle, with string support 
(mg being the weight expressed in newtons) 
v2/rg 
This angle represents the correct angle of bank for any vehicle, whether it be 
bicycle, car or aeroplane, to turn a corner of radius r metres, at velocity v 
metres per second, if there is to be no tendency to slip inwards or to skid out- 
wards. 
Centrifugal force 
We have managed to arrive so far without mentioning the term centrifugal 
force. This is rather curious because centrifugal force is a term in everyday use, 
while centripetal force is hardly known except to the student of mechanics. 
Consider again the stone rotating, on a table, in a horizontal circle. We have 
established the fact that there is an inward force on the stone, exerted by the 
string, for the set purpose of providing the acceleration towards the centre -- 
yes, centripetal force, however unknown it may be, is a real, practical, physical 
force. But is there also an outward force? 
The situation is similar to that of the accelerating aircraft towing a glider 
that we described earlier. There is an outward reaction force on the outer end 
of the string caused by the fact that it is accelerating the stone inwards: an 
inertia force, and we could call this a centrifugal reaction force. This keeps the 
string in tension in a state of equilibrium just as if it were tied to a wall and 
pulled. Note, however, that there is no outward force on the stone, only an 
inward one applied by the string to produce the centripetal acceleration. As 
with the accelerating glider described previously and shown in Fig. 1.2, the 
forces on the two ends of the string are in balance, but the forces on the object, 
the stone or the glider are not, and hence acceleration occurs. 
The concept of inertia forces is a difficult one. In a free-body diagram of the 
horizontally whirling stone, the only externally applied horizontal force is the 
inward force applied by the string. This force provides the necessary accelera- 
tion. There may be outward forces on the internal components of the system 
like the string, but not on the overall system. Note that if you let go of the 
string, the stone will not fly outwards, it will fly off at a tangent. 
To sum up motion on curved paths. There is an acceleration (v2/r) towards 
the centre, necessitating a centripetal force of mv2/r. 
At this stage, the reader is advised to try some numerical questions on 
motion on curved paths in Appendix 3. 
16 MECHANICS OF FLIGHT 
The mechanics of flight 
A knowledge of the principles of mechanics -- and particularly of the signifi- 
cance and meaning of the force of gravity, of accelerated motion, of centripetal 
and centrifugal force and motion on curved paths -- will help us to understand 
the movements and manoeuvres of an aeroplane. This knowledge will also 
help us to understand the movement of satellites and spacecraft. 
Work, power and energy 
These three terms are used frequently in mechanics, so we must understand 
their meaning. This is especially important because they are common words 
too in ordinary conversation, but with rather different shades of meaning. 
A force is said to do work on a body when it moves the body in the direc- 
tion in which it is acting, and the amount of work done is measured by the 
product of the force and the distance moved in the direction of the force. Thus 
if a force of 10 newtons moves a body 2 m (along its line of action), it does 20 
newton metres (Nm) of work. A newton metre, the unit of work, is called a 
joule (J). Notice that, according to mechanics, you do no work at all if you 
push something without succeeding in moving it -- no matter how hard you 
push or for how long you push. Notice that you do no work if the body moves 
in the opposite direction, or even at right angles to the direction in which you 
push. Someone else must be doing some pushing -- and some work! 
Power is simply the rate of doing work. If the force of 10 N moves the body 
2 m in 5 seconds, then the power is 20 Nm (20 joules) in 5 seconds, or 4 joules 
per second. A joule per second (J/s) is called a watt (W), the unit of power. So 
the power used in this example is 4 watts. Readers who have studied electricity 
will already be familiar with the watt as a unit of electrical power; this is just 
one example of the general trend towards the realisation that all branches of 
science are inter-related. Note the importance of the time taken, i.e. of the rate 
at which the work is done; the word power or powerful, is apt to give an 
impression of size and brute force. The unit of 1 watt is small for practical use, 
and kilowatts are more often used. The old unit of a horse-power was never 
very satisfactory but, as a matter of interest, it was the equivalent of 745.7 
watts (Fig. 1B). 
A body is said to have energy if it has the ability to do work, and the 
amount of energy is reckoned by the amount of work that it can do. The units 
of energy will therefore be the same as those of work. We know that petrol can 
do work by driving a car or an aeroplane, a man can do work by propelling a 
bicycle or even by walking, a chemical battery can drive an electric motor 
which can do work on a train, an explosive can drive a shell at high speed 
from the muzzle of a gun. All this means that energy can exist in many forms, 
17 
MECHANICS 
heat, light, sound, electrical, chemical, magnetic, atomic -- and, most useful of 
all, mechanical. A little thought will convince us how much of our time and 
energy is spent in converting, or trying to convert, other forms of energy into 
mechanical energy, the eventual form which enables us to get somewhere. The 
human body is simply a form of engine -- not a simple form of engine -- in 
which the energy contained in food is converted into useful, or useless, work. 
Unfortunately there is a tendency for energy to slip back again, we might 
almost say deteriorate, into other forms, and our efforts to produce mechan- 
ical energy are not always very efficient. 
Even mechanical energy can exist in more than one form; a weight that is 
high up can do work in descending, and it is said to possess potential energy 
or energy of position; a mass that is moving rapidly can do work in coming to 
rest, and it is therefore said to have kinetic energy or energy of motion; a 
spring that is wound up, a gas that is compressed, even an elastic material that 
is stretched, all can do work in regaining their original state, and all possess 
energy which is in a sense potential but which is given various names 
according to its application. 
In figures, a weight of 50 newtons raised to a height of 2 metres above its 
base has 100 joules of potential energy or, to be more correct, it has 100 joules 
more potential energy than it had when at its base. This was the work done to 
raise it to the new position, and it is the work that it should be able to do in 
returning to its base. 
In symbols, W newtons at height h metres has -- 
Wh joules of energy. 
What is the kinetic energy of mass of m kg moving at v m/s? 
We don't know, of course, how it got its kinetic energy, but the actual 
process is unimportant, so let us suppose that it was accelerated uniformly at 
a metres per second per second from zero velocity to v metres per second by 
being pushed by a constant force of F newtons. 
If the distance travelled during the acceleration was s metres, then the work 
done, i.e. its kinetic energy, will be Fs joules. 
Butv2 u2 2as(andu 0) 
 v2 2as 
 s v2/2a 
ButF ma 
SoK.E.  Fs ma v2/2a mv2joules. 
1 
2 
18 MECHANICS OF FLIGHT 
Fig 1B Power (opposite) (By courtesy of the Lockheed Aircraft 
Corporation, USA) 
The Lockheed C-5 Galaxy with four turbofan engines, each of 183 kN 
thrust represents a total power of 183 000 kW at the maximum level 
speed of about 900 km/h. 
19 
MECHANICS 
Thus the kinetic energy of 2 kg moving at 10 m/s 
mv2 
  2 102 
100 joules 
Energy and momentum 
Let us be sure that we understand the differences between energy and 
momentum, because we shall be concerned with this later on. 
Energy is 1/2 mv2. Momentum is mv. 
So the mass of 2 kg, moving at 10 m/s, has 100 units of energy (joules), but 
2 10, i.e. 20 units, of momentum (kg m/s). 
Yes, but there is more to it than that. 
Consider two bodies colliding, e.g. billiard balls. 
The total momentum after the collision is the same as the total momentum 
before; the momentum lost by one ball is exactly the same as the momentum 
gained by the other. This is the principle of the conservation of momentum. (In 
considering this it must be remembered that momentum has direction, because 
velocity has direction.) The law will apply whether the balls rebound, or 
whether they stick together, or whatever they do. 
But the total mechanical energy after the collision will not be the same as 
before; energy will be dissipated, it will go into the air in the form of heat, 
sound, etc.; the total energy of the universe will not be changed by the colli- 
sion -- but that of the balls will be. 
So momentum is a more permanent property than energy, the latter is often 
wasted and we shall sometimes find it unfortunate that in order to give a body 
momentum we must also give it energy. 
Fluid pressure 
In the mechanics of flight we shall be chiefly concerned with fluid pressure, 
that is, the pressure in a liquid or gas, and the force that it produces. The 
reason why a fluid exerts a force is because its molecules are in rapid motion 
and bombard any surface that is placed in the fluid; each molecule exerts only 
a tiny force on the surface but the combined effect of the bombardment of mil- 
lions upon millions of molecules results in an evenly distributed force on the 
surface. 
Pressure is a scalar quantity. That means that it has a magnitude, but unlike 
a vector, there is no direction involved. When a fluid at rest is in contact with 
12 
12 
20 MECHANICS OF FLIGHT 
a surface, the pressure produces a force which acts at right angles to the 
surface (Fig. 1.8). Note that the force does have a direction whereas the 
pressure that causes it does not. It is not surprising that people often confuse 
cause and effect when talking about pressure. You will find many old books 
that say that pressure acts equally in all directions. It does not. Pressure does 
not act in any direction; it is the force due to pressure that acts in a direction. 
The direction of the force is always at right angles to the surface that the 
pressure is exposed to. We measure pressure in terms of the force that it will 
produce on an area, so pressure has the units of newtons per square metre 
(N/m2). 
A pressure of 1 N/m2 is also called a pascal (Pa). Another common metric 
unit of pressure is the millibar (mb), which is 1/1000 th of a bar: a bar being 
105 N/m2. This seemingly odd unit comes about, because 1 bar is very close to 
the standard atmospheric pressure at sea level. It had been adopted by meteo- 
rologists many years before the metric SI units were introduced, and the reader 
may often encounter atmospheric pressure given in millibars, particularly in 
flying manuals. In this book, we will use millibars for atmospheric pressure 
when appropriate, as in dealing with the effects of altitude. However, for most 
straightforward aerodynamic calculations we will use N/m2 since this is 
normal practice in European educational institutions. 
Density 
Density is defined as the mass per unit volume of a substance, so it has the 
units of kg/m3 in the SI metric system. Notice that it is mass and not weight 
that is used in this definition. The symbol commonly used for density is the 
Greek letter r. 
As we will see later, the density of air changes with height and with the 
weather conditions. The density of water is conveniently 1000 kg/m3, and 
hardly varies at all, even if subjected to a very high pressure. 
21 
MECHANICS 
Fig 1.8 Force due to pressure acts at right angles to the surface 
Pressure and density variation in a stationary fluid 
The pressure in a stationary fluid increases with depth. This variation is rather 
complicated in the case of air because the density also increases with depth. These 
variations are very important for aircraft flight and in the next chapter the changes 
of pressure, density and temperature with height are described in some detail. 
In a liquid, matters are much simpler; the density remains almost constant, 
and the pressure change is directly proportional to the change in depth. In a 
liquid, the pressure variation is given by the simple expression: 
Change in pressure = density gravity constant change in depth 
Or:Dp r g (changeindepth) 
This book is about the mechanics of aircraft flight, so you might wonder why 
we should have any interest in the way that pressure varies in a liquid. The 
answer is that it is because the easiest way to measure pressure is to use a U- 
shaped tube containing liquid. This is known as a U-tube manometer, and is 
described in the next chapter. 
The behaviour of gases 
In the study of the flight of aircraft, we are really only interested in the behav- 
iour of one particular gas, air. The most important relationship that we need 
to know is called the gas law, which can be written as: 
 RT 
where p is the pressure, is the density, T is the temperature measured relative 
to absolute zero (i.e. in degrees Kelvin in the SI system), and R is a constant 
called the gas constant. 
If the gas is compressed its density increases, so either or both the other 
quantities, temperature or pressure, must change. The way that they change 
depends on how the compression takes place. If the compression is very slow, 
and the gas is contained in a poorly insulated vessel so that heat is trans- 
ferred out of the system, then the temperature will stay constant, and the 
pressure change will be directly proportional to the density change. This is 
called an isothermal process, and it involves a heat transfer from the gas to 
its surroundings. In this case the relationship between pressure and density is 
given by: 
a constant 
p 
p 
22 MECHANICS OF FLIGHT 
If the compression takes place with no transfer of heat, which commonly 
occurs when compression is very rapid, then the change is said to be adiabatic. 
If the change also takes place without any increase in turbulence, so there is 
no increase in the disorder (entropy) of the system, then the process is called 
isentropic, and the relationship between pressure and density is given by: 
a constant 
where is the ratio of the specific heat at constant pressure to the specific heat 
at constant volume, and has a value of approximately 1.4 for air. 
We cannot go much further down this path without becoming embroiled in 
the complexities of thermodynamics, however, and as the relationships above 
are the only ones that are relevant to the understanding of the contents of this 
book, we will not pursue the subject any further. 
Composition and resolution of forces, velocities, etc. 
A force is a vector quantity -- it has magnitude and direction, and can be rep- 
resented by a straight line, passing through the point at which the force is 
applied, its length representing the magnitude of the force, and its direction 
corresponding to that in which the force is acting. Forces can be added, or sub- 
tracted, to form a resultant force, or they can be resolved, that is to say, split 
into component parts, by drawing the vectors to represent them (Fig. 1.9). 
p 
23 
MECHANICS 
Resultant C 
A 
B 
Resultant C 
A 
B 
Component of W 
along plane 
Component of W 
at rt. angles to plane 
W 
Fig 1.9 Composition and resolution of vector quantities 
Note that velocity and momentum are also vector quantities and can be rep- 
resented in the same way by straight lines. Mass, on the other hand, is not; a 
mass has no direction, and this is yet another distinction between a force and 
a mass. 
The triangle, parallelogram, and polygon of forces 
If three forces which act at a point are in equilibrium, they can be represented 
by the sides of a triangle taken in order (Fig. 1.10). This is called the principle 
of the triangle of forces, and the so-called parallelogram of forces is really the 
same thing, two sides and the diagonal of the parallelogram corresponding to 
the triangle. 
If there are more than three forces, the principle of the polygon of forces is 
used -- when any number of forces acting at a point are in equilibrium, the 
polygon formed by the vectors representing the forces and taken in order will 
form a closed figure, or, conversely, if the polygon is a closed figure the forces 
are in equilibrium. 
Moments, couples and the principles of moments 
The moment of a force about any point is the product of the force and the per- 
pendicular distance from the point to the line of action of the force. 
Thus the moment of a force of 10 N about a point whose shortest distance 
from the line of action is 3 m (Fig. 1.11) is 10 3 30 N-m. Notice that, 
though both are measured by force distance, there is a subtle but important 
distinction between a moment (unit N-m) and the work done by a force (unit 
Nm, or joules). 
The distance in the moment is merely a leverage and no movement is 
involved; moments cannot be measured in joules. 
24 MECHANICS OF FLIGHT 
Force in B 
Force in A 
W 
W 
A 
B 
Fig 1.10 Triangle of forces 
A moment is normally taken to be positive if it is in a clockwise direction, 
and negative if it is in an anti-clockwise direction. 
If a body is in equilibrium under the influence of several forces in the same 
plane, the sum of the clockwise moments about any point is equal to the sum 
of the anti-clockwise moments about that point, or, what amounts to the same 
thing and is much shorter to express, the total moment is zero. This is called 
the principle of moments, and applies whether the forces are parallel or not. 
When considering the forces acting on a body, the weight of the body itself 
is often one of the most important forces to be considered. The weight may be 
taken as acting through the centre of gravity, which is defined as the point 
through which the resultant weight acts whatever position the body may be in. 
Two equal and opposite parallel forces are called a couple. The moment of 
a couple is one of the forces multiplied by the distance between the two, i.e. 
by the arm of the couple. Notice that the moment is the same about any point 
(Fig. 1.12), and a couple has no resultant. 
MomentsaboutO.P10 1 10clock,Q10 1 10clock, 
Total 20 clock. 
Moments about A. P zero, Q 10 2 20 clock, 
Total 20 clock. 
Moments about B. P 10 2 20 clock, Q zero, 
Total 20 clock. 
MomentsaboutC.P10 6 60clock,Q10 4 40anti, 
Total 20 clock. 
25 
MECHANICS 
Force 10 newtons 
3 metres 
Fig 1.11 Moment of a force 
(Anti-clockwise) 
P 10 newtons 
2 metres 
4 metres 
Q 10 newtons 
AB 
C 
O 
Fig 1.12 A couple 
Mechanics of flight 
We do not pretend to have covered all the principles of mechanics, nor even to 
have explained fully those that have been covered. All we have done has been 
to select some aspects of the subject which seem to form the chief stumbling 
blocks in the understanding of how an aeroplane flies; we have attempted to 
remove them as stumbling blocks, and perhaps even so to arrange them that, 
instead, they become stepping stones to the remainder of the subject. In the 
next chapter we will turn to our real subject -- the Mechanics of Flight. 
Before continuing, try to answer some of the questions below, and the 
numerical questions in Appendix 3. 
Can you answer these? 
These questions are tests not so much of mechanical knowledge as of mechan- 
ical sense. Try to puzzle them out. Some of them are easy, some difficult; the 
answers are given in Appendix 5. 
1 A lift is descending, and is stopping at the ground floor. In what direction 
is the acceleration? 
2 What is the difference between -- 
(a) Pressure and Force? 
(b) Moment and Momentum? 
(c) Energy and Work? 
3 Why does it require less force to pull a body up an inclined plane than lift 
it vertically? Is the same work done in each case? 
4 Distinguish between the mass and weight of a body. 
5 If the drag of an aeroplane is equal to the thrust of the propeller in straight 
and level flight, what makes the aeroplane go forward? 
6 Is the thrust greater than the drag during take-off? 
7 Can the centre of gravity of a body be outside the body itself? 
8 Is an aeroplane in a state of equilibrium during -- 
(a) A steady climb? 
(b) Take-off? 
9 Are the following the same, or less, or more, on the surface of the moon 
as on the surface of the earth -- 
26 MECHANICS OF FLIGHT 
(a) The weight of a given body as measured on a spring balance? 
(b) The apparent weight of a given body as measured on a weigh-bridge 
(using standard set of weights)? 
(c) The time of fall of a body from 100 m? 
(d) The time of swing of the same pendulum? 
(e) The thrust given by a rocket? 
10 In a tug-o'-war does the winning team exert more force on the rope than 
the losing team? 
11 Are the following in equilibrium -- 
(a) A book resting on a table? 
(b) A train ascending an incline at a steady speed? 
12 A flag is flying from a vertical flag pole mounted on the top of a large 
balloon. If the balloon is flying in a strong but steady east wind, in what 
direction will the flag point? 
For solutions see Appendix 5. 
For numerical examples on mechanics see Appendix 3. 
27 
MECHANICS 
Introduction -- significance of the speed of sound 
As was explained in Chapter 1, the remainder of the book will be concerned 
almost entirely with fluids in motion or, what comes to much the same thing, 
with motion through fluids. But it would be misleading even to start 
explaining the subject without a mention of the significance of the speed of 
sound. 
The simple fact is that fluids behave quite differently when they move, or 
when bodies move through them, at speeds below and at speeds above the 
speed at which sound travels in that fluid. This virtually means that in order 
to understand modern flight we have to study two subjects -- flight at speeds 
below that at which sound travels in air, and flight at speeds above that speed 
-- in other words, flight at subsonic and flight at supersonic speeds. 
To complicate things still further, the airflow at speeds near the speed of 
sound, transonic speeds, is complex enough to be yet a third subject in its own 
right. We shall cover these subjects as fully as we can, but we must not let our 
natural interest in supersonic flight tempt us to try to run before we can walk, 
and in the early chapters the emphasis will be on flight at subsonic speeds, 
though we shall point out from time to time where we may expect to find dif- 
ferences at supersonic speeds. 
But first let us have a closer look at the fluid, air, with which we are most 
concerned. 
Invisibility of the atmosphere 
Air is invisible, and this fact in itself makes flight difficult to understand. When 
a ship passes through water we can see the 'bow wave', the 'wash' astern, and 
all the turbulence which is caused; when an aeroplane makes its way through 
Air and airflow -- 
subsonic speeds 
CHAPTER2 
air nothing appears to happen -- yet in reality there has been even more com- 
motion (Fig. 2.1). 
If only we could see this commotion, many of the phenomena of flight 
would need much less explanation, and certainly if the turbulence formed in 
the atmosphere were visible no one could have doubted the improvement to 
be gained by such inventions as streamlining. After some experience it is poss- 
ible to cultivate the habit of 'seeing the air' as it flows past bodies of different 
shapes, and the ability to do this is made easier by introducing smoke into the 
air or by watching the flow of water, which exhibits many characteristics 
similar to those of air. 
Density of the air 
Another property of air which is apt to give us misleading ideas when we first 
begin to study flight is its low density. The air feels thin, it is difficult for us to 
obtain any grip upon it, and if it has any mass at all we usually consider it as 
negligible for all practical purposes. Ask anyone who has not studied the ques- 
tion, 'What is the mass of air in any ordinary room?' -- you will probably 
receive answers varying from 'almost nothing' up to 'about 5 kilograms.' Yet 
the real answer will be nearer 150 kilograms, and in a large hall may be over 
a metric tonne! Again, most of us who have tried to dive have experienced the 
sensation of coming down 'flat' onto the surface of the water; since then we 
29 
AIR AND AIRFLOW -- SUBSONIC SPEEDS 
Fig 2.1 'Seeing the air' 
have treated water with respect, realising that it has substance, that it can exert 
forces which have to be reckoned with. We have probably had no such experi- 
ence with air, yet if we ever try we shall find that the opening of a parachute 
after a long drop will cause just such a jerk as when we encountered the 
surface of the water. It is, of course, true that the density of air -- i.e. the mass 
per unit volume -- is low compared with water (the mass of a cubic metre of 
air at ground level is roughly 1.226 kg -- whereas the mass of a cubic metre of 
water is a metric tonne, 1000 kg, nearly 800 times as much); yet it is this very 
property of air -- its density -- which makes all flight possible, or perhaps we 
should say airborne flight possible, because this does not apply to rockets. The 
balloon, the kite, the parachute and the aeroplane -- all of them are supported 
in the air by forces which are entirely dependent on its density; the less the 
density, the more difficult does flight become; and for all of them flight 
becomes impossible in a vacuum. So let us realise the fact that, however thin 
the air may seem to be, it possesses the property of density. 
Inertia of the air 
It will now be easy to understand that air must also possess, in common with 
other substances, the property of inertia and the tendency to obey the laws of 
mechanics. Thus air which is still will tend to remain still, while air which is 
moving will tend to remain moving and will resist any change of speed or 
direction (First Law); secondly, if we wish to alter the state of rest or uniform 
motion of air, or to change the direction of the airflow, we must apply a force 
to the air, and the more sudden the change of speed or direction and the 
greater the mass of air affected, the greater must be the force applied (Second 
Law); and, thirdly, the application of such a force upon the air will cause an 
equal and opposite reaction upon the surface which produces the force (Third 
Law). 
Pressure of the atmosphere 
As explained in Chapter 1, the weight of air above any surface produces a 
pressure at that surface -- i.e. a force of so many newtons per square metre of 
surface. The average pressure at sea-level due to the weight of the atmosphere 
is about 101 kN/m2, a pressure which causes the mercury in a barometer to 
rise about 760 mm. This pressure is sometimes referred to as 'one atmosphere', 
and high pressures are then spoken of in terms of 'atmospheres'. The higher 
we ascend in the atmosphere, the less will be the weight of air above us, and 
so the less will be the pressure. 
30 MECHANICS OF FLIGHT 
Decrease of pressure and density with altitude 
The rate at which the pressure decreases is much greater near the earth's 
surface than at altitude. This is easily seen by reference to Fig. 2.2 (overleaf); 
between sea-level and 10 000 ft (3480 m) the pressure has been reduced from 
1013 mb to 697 mb, a drop of 316 mb; whereas for the corresponding increase 
of 10 000 ft between 20 000 ft (6096 m) and 30 000 ft (9144 m), the decrease 
of pressure is from 466 mb to 301 mb, a drop of only 165 mb; and between 
70000ft(21336m)and80000ft(24384m)thedropis only17mb. 
This is because air is compressible; the air near the earth's surface is com- 
pressed by the air above it, and as we go higher the pressure becomes less, the 
air becomes less dense, so that if we could see a cross-section of the atmos- 
phere it would not appear homogeneous -- i.e. of uniform density -- but it 
would become thinner from the earth's surface upwards, the final change from 
atmosphere to space being so gradual as to be indistinguishable. In this respect 
air differs from liquids such as water; in liquids there is a definite dividing line 
or surface at the top; and beneath the surface of a liquid the pressure increases 
in direct proportion to the depth because the liquid, being practically incom- 
pressible, remains of the same density at all depths. 
Temperature changes in the atmosphere 
Another change which takes place as we travel upwards through the lower 
layers of the atmosphere is the gradual drop in temperature, a fact which 
unhappily disposes of one of the oldest legends about flying -- that of Daedalus 
and his son Icarus, whose wings were attached by wax which melted because 
he flew too near the sun. In most parts of the world, the atmospheric tempera- 
ture falls off at a steady rate called the lapse rate of about  6.5°C for every 
1000 metres increase in height up to about 11 000 metres. Above 11 000 
metres, the temperature remains nearly constant until the outer regions of the 
atmosphere are reached. The portion of the atmosphere below the height at 
which the change occurs is called the troposphere, and the portion above, the 
stratosphere. The interface between the two is called the tropopause. The lapse 
rate and the height of the tropopause vary with latitude. In Arctic regions, the 
rate of temperature change is lower, and the stratosphere does not start until 
around 15 500 m. The temperature in the stratosphere varies between about 
 30°C at the equator to  95°C in the Arctic. In temperate regions such as 
Europe the temperature in the stratosphere is around  56.5°C. 
For aircraft performance calculations, it is normal practice to use a stan- 
dard set of conditions called the International Standard Atmosphere (ISA). 
This defines precise values of lapse rate, height of the tropopause, and sea-level 
values of temperature, pressure and density. For temperate regions the ISA 
31 
AIR AND AIRFLOW -- SUBSONIC SPEEDS 
32 MECHANICS OF FLIGHT 
299 ---- 0.040 ---- 2.5 ---- 222 25 
298 ---- 0.047 ---- 3.0 ---- 221 24 
298 ---- 0.055 ---- 3.5 ---- 220 23 
297 ---- 0.065 ---- 4.0 ---- 219 22 
296 ---- 0.076 ---- 4.7 ---- 218 21 
295 ---- 0.089 ---- 5.5 ---- 217 20 
295 ---- 0.104 ---- 6.5 ---- 217 19 
295 ---- 0.122 ---- 7.6 ---- 217 18 
295 ---- 0.142 ---- 8.8 ---- 217 17 
295 ---- 0.166 ---- 10.4 ---- 217 16 
295 ---- 0.195 ---- 12.1 ---- 217 15 
295 ---- 0.228 ---- 14.2 ---- 217 14 
295 ---- 0.267 ---- 16.6 ---- 217 13 
295 ---- 0.312 ---- 19.4 ---- 217 12 
295 ---- 0.365 ---- 22.7 ---- 217 11 
299 ---- 0.414 ---- 26.5 ---- 223 10 
304 ---- 0.467 ---- 30.8 ---- 230 9 
308 ---- 0.526 ---- 35.7 ---- 236 8 
313 ---- 0.590 ---- 41.1 ---- 243 
317 ---- 0.660 ---- 47.2 ---- 249 6 
321 ---- 0.736 ---- 54.0 ---- 256 5 
325 ---- 0.819 ---- 61.7 ---- 262 
329 ---- 0.909 ---- 70.1 ---- 269 3 
333 ---- 1.007 ---- 79.5 ---- 275 
337 ---- 1.112 ---- 89.9 ---- 282 
340 1.225 101.3 288 
Speed 
of sound 
m/s Density 
kg/m3 Press. 
kN/m2 Temp. 
°K 
Height 
above 
sea-level 
Thou- 
sands 
of feet 
km 
Temp. 
°C Press. 
mb 
Relative 
density 
?/?0 
Relative 
pressure 
p/p0 
High Cumulus clouds 
Sea level 
5 
2 
1 
7 
4 
80 --52 ---- 28 ---- 0.036 ---- 0.028 
75 --54 ---- 35 ---- 0.046 ---- 0.035 
70 --55 ---- 45 ---- 0.059 ---- 0.044 
65 --56 ---- 57 ---- 0.075 ---- 0.056 
60 --56 ---- 72 ---- 0.095 ---- 0.071 
55 --56 ---- 92 ---- 0.121 ---- 0.091 
50 --56 ---- 117 ---- 0.153 ---- 0.115 
45 --56 ---- 148 ---- 0.194 ---- 0.145 
40 --56 ---- 188 ---- 0.247 ---- 0.186 
35 --54 ---- 239 ---- 0.311 ---- 0.236 
30 --44 ---- 301 ---- 0.375 ---- 0.298 
25 --34 ---- 377 ---- 0.449 ---- 0.372 
20 --25 ---- 466 ---- 0.533 ---- 0.460 
15 --15 ---- 572 ---- 0.629 ---- 0.565 
10 --5 ---- 697 ---- 0.739 ---- 0.688 
5 ---- 843 ---- 0.862 ---- 0.832 
15 1013 1.000 1.000 
Stratus and Nimbus clouds 
Upper stratosphere
Lower stratosphere
Mt 
Troposphere
Cirrus clouds 
Everest 
Mt 
Blanc 
Fig 2.2 The International Standard Atmosphere 
Based on the US Standard Atmosphere, 1962, which was prepared under 
the sponsorship of NASA, the USAF and the US Weather Bureau. 
value of the lapse rate is  6.5°C per 1000 m, the tropopause is at 11 km, and 
the sea-level values of pressure and temperature are 101.325 kN/m2, and 15°C 
respectively. 
Modern long- and medium-range airliners cruise in or very close to the 
stratosphere, and the supersonic airliner Concorde used to fly in the strato- 
sphere well above the tropopause. When piston-engined aircraft first started to 
fly in the stratosphere, conditions were very uncomfortable for the crew. The 
low density and pressure meant that oxygen masks had to be worn, and at 
temperatures of  56°C, even the heavy fur-lined clothing was barely 
adequate. Nowadays, the cabins of high-flying airliners are pressurised, and 
the air is heated, so that the passengers are unaware of the external conditions. 
Nevertheless, above every seat there is an emergency oxygen mask to be used 
in the event of a sudden failure of the pressurisation system. 
Despite the low external air temperature in the stratosphere, supersonic air- 
craft have the problem that surface friction heats the aircraft up during flight, 
so means have to be provided to keep the cabin cool enough. 
Effect of temperature and pressure on density 
Although air is not quite a 'perfect gas' it does obey the gas law within reason- 
able limits, so we can say that 
 RT 
It is often convenient to express the density in terms of the ratio of the density 
at some height r to the value at standard sea-level conditions r0. This ratio r/r0 
is usually denoted by the Greek letter s, and is called the relative density. 
EXAMPLE 2.1 
If the temperature at sea-level in the temperate ISA is 15°C, and the lapse rate 
is 6.5°C per km, find the temperature and density at 6 km altitude where the 
pressure is 47 200 N/m2. The gas constant R 287 J/kg K. 
SOLUTION 
First we must convert all temperatures to absolute (Kelvin). Sea-level tempera- 
ture is 
273 15 288K. 
Temperature at 6000 m is 
288 6.5 6 249K 
The gas law states that 
 RTorr 
so the density at 6 km is 
p 
RT 
p 
p 
33 
AIR AND AIRFLOW -- SUBSONIC SPEEDS 
0.66 kg/m3 
Viscosity 
An important property of air in so far as it affects flight is its viscosity. This is 
a measure of the resistance of one layer of air to movement over the neigh- 
bouring layer; it is rather similar to the property of friction between solids. It 
is owing to viscosity that eddies are formed when the air is disturbed by a body 
passing through it, and these eddies are responsible for many of the 
phenomena of flight. Viscosity is possessed to a large degree by fluids such as 
treacle and certain oils, and although the property is much less noticeable in 
air, it is none the less of considerable importance. 
Winds and up-and-down currents 
The existence of separate regions of high and low pressure is the cause of 
wind, or bodily movement of large portions of the atmosphere. Winds vary 
from the extensive trade winds caused by belts of high and low pressure sur- 
rounding the earth's surface to the purely local gusts and 'bumps', caused by 
local differences of temperature and pressure. On the earth's surface we are 
usually only concerned with the horizontal velocity of winds, but when flying 
the rising convection currents and the corresponding downward movements of 
the air are also important. The study of winds, of up-and-down convection 
currents, of cyclones and anti-cyclones, and the weather changes produced by 
them -- all these form the fascinating science of meteorology, and the reader 
who is interested is referred to books on that subject. 
In the lower regions of the atmosphere conditions are apt to be erratic; this 
is especially so within the first few hundred feet. It often happens that as we 
begin to climb the temperature rises instead of falling -- called an inversion of 
temperature. This in itself upsets the stability of the air, and further distur- 
bances may be caused by the sun heating some parts of the earth's surface 
more than others, causing thermal up-currents, and by the wind blowing over 
uneven ground, hangars, hills, and so on. On the windward side of a large 
building, or of a hill, the wind is deflected upwards, and on the leeward side 
it is apt to leave the contour altogether, forming large eddies which may result 
in a flow of air near the ground back towards the building or up the far side 
of the hill, that is to say in the opposite direction to that of the main wind. 
Even when the surface of the ground is comparatively flat, as on the average 
airfield, the wind is retarded near the ground by the roughness of the surface, 
and successive layers are held back by the layers below them -- due to viscosity 
47 200 
287 249 
34 MECHANICS OF FLIGHT 
-- and so the wind velocity gradually increases from the ground upwards. This 
phenomenon is called wind gradient. When the wind velocity is high it is very 
appreciable, and since most of the effect takes place within a few metres of the 
ground it has to be reckoned with when landing. 
Quite apart from this wind gradient very close to the ground, there is often 
also a wind gradient on a larger scale. Generally, it can be said that on the average 
day the wind velocity increases with height for many thousands of feet, and it 
also tends to veer, i.e. to change in a clockwise direction (from north towards 
east, etc.); at the same time it becomes more steady and there are fewer bumps. 
Air speed and ground speed 
But our chief concern with the wind at the present moment is that we must 
understand that when we speak of the speed of an aeroplane we mean its speed 
relative to the air, or air speed as it is usually termed. Now the existence of a 
wind simply means that portions of the air are in motion relative to the earth, 
and although the wind will affect the speed of the aeroplane relative to the 
earth -- i.e. its ground speed -- it will not affect its speed relative to the air. 
For instance, suppose that an aeroplane is flying from A to B (60 km apart), 
and that the normal speed of the aeroplane (i.e. its air speed) is 100 km/h (see 
Fig. 2.3). If there is a wind of 40 km/h blowing from B towards A, the ground 
speed of the aeroplane as it travels from A to B will be 60 km/h, and it will 
take one hour to reach B, but the air speed will be 100 km/h. If, when the aero- 
plane reaches B, it turns and flies back to A, the ground speed on the return 
journey will be 140 km/h (Fig. 2.4); the time to regain A will be less than half 
an hour, but the air speed will still remain 100 km/h -- that is, the wind will 
strike the aeroplane at the same speed as on the outward journey. Similarly, if 
the wind had been blowing across the path, the pilot would have inclined his 
aeroplane several degrees towards the wind on both journeys so that it would 
have travelled crabwise, but again, on both outward and homeward journeys 
the air speed would have been 100 km/h and the wind would have been a 
headwind straight from the front as far as the aeroplane was concerned. 
35 
AIR AND AIRFLOW -- SUBSONIC SPEEDS 
Air speed 
100 km/h 
Wind velocity 
40 km 
60 km 
/h 
Ground 
speed 
AB 
60 km/h 
 
 
Fig 2.3 Outward flight 
Air speed 
100 km/h 
Ground 
speed 
Wind velocity 
40 km/h 
140 km/h 
60 km 
AB 
 
 
Fig 2.4 Return flight 
An aeroplane which encounters a headwind equal to its own air speed will 
appear to an observer on the ground to stay still, yet its air speed will be high. 
A free balloon flying in a wind travels over the ground, yet it has no air speed 
-- a flag on the balloon will hang vertically downwards. 
All this may appear simple, and it is in fact simple, but it is surprising how 
long it sometimes takes a student of flight to grasp the full significance of air 
speed and all that it means. There are still pilots who say that their engine is 
overheating because they are flying 'down wind'! It is not only a question of 
speed, but of direction also; a glider may not lose height in a rising current of 
air (it may, in fact, gain height), yet it is all the time descending relative to the 
air. In short, the only true way to watch the motion of an aeroplane is to 
imagine that one is in a balloon floating freely with the wind and to make all 
observations relative to the balloon. 
Ground speed is, of course, important when the aeroplane is changing from 
one medium to another, such as in taking-off and landing, and also in the time 
taken and the course to be steered when flying cross-country -- this is the 
science of navigation, and once again the student who is interested must 
consult books on that subject. 
The reader may have noticed that we have not been altogether consistent, 
nor true to the SI system, in the units that we have used for speed; these 
already include m/s, km/h and knots. There are good reasons for this inconsis- 
tency, the main one being that for a long time to come it is likely to be standard 
practice to use knots for navigational purposes both by sea and by air, km/h 
for speeds on land, e.g. of cars, while m/s is not only the proper SI unit but it 
must be used in certain formulae. We shall continue to use these different units 
throughout the book as and when each is most appropriate, and the important 
thing to remember is that it is only a matter of simple conversion from one to 
the other -- 
1 knot 0.514 m/s 1.85 km/h 
Chemical composition of the atmosphere 
We have, up to the present, only considered the physical properties of the 
atmosphere, and, in fact, we are hardly concerned with its chemical or other 
properties. Air, however, is a mixture of gases, chiefly nitrogen and oxygen, in 
the proportion of approximately four-fifths nitrogen to one-fifth oxygen. Of 
the two main gases, nitrogen is an inert gas, but oxygen is necessary for human 
life and also for the proper combustion of the fuel used in the engine, there- 
fore when at great heights the air becomes thin it is necessary to provide more 
oxygen. In the case of the pilot, this was formerly done by supplying him with 
pure oxygen from a cylinder, but in modern high-flying aircraft, the whole 
cabin is pressurised so that pilot, crew and passengers can still breathe air of 
36 MECHANICS OF FLIGHT 
similar density, pressure, temperature and composition as that to which they 
are accustomed at ground level, or at some reasonable height. As for the 
engines, it has always been preferable to provide extra air rather than oxygen, 
because although the oxygen is needed for combustion, the nitrogen provides, 
as it were, the larger part of the working substance which actually drives the 
engine. In piston engines the extra air is provided by a process known as super- 
charging, which means blowing in extra air by means of a fan or fans; in jet 
aircraft the principle is fundamentally the same, though simpler because the 
engine is in itself a supercharger and this, combined with the 'ram effect' at the 
higher true speeds achieved at altitude, keeps up the supply of air as necessary. 
The international standard atmosphere 
The reader will have realised that there is liable to be considerable variation in 
those properties of the atmosphere with which we are concerned -- namely, 
temperature, pressure and density. Since the performance of engine, aeroplane 
and propeller is dependent on these three factors, it will be obvious that the 
actual performance of an aeroplane does not give a true basis of comparison 
with other aeroplanes, and for this reason the International Standard 
Atmosphere has been adopted. The properties assumed for this standard 
atmosphere in temperate regions are those given in Fig. 2.2, earlier. If, now, the 
actual performance of an aeroplane is measured under certain conditions of 
temperature, pressure and density, it is possible to deduce what would have 
been the performance under the conditions of the Standard Atmosphere, and 
thus it can be compared with the performance of some other aeroplane which 
has been similarly reduced to standard conditions. 
The altimeter 
The instrument normally used for measuring height is the altimeter, which was 
traditionally merely an aneroid barometer graduated in feet or metres instead 
of millimetres of mercury or millibars. As a barometer it will record the 
pressure of the air, and since the pressure is dependent on the temperature as 
well as the height, it is only possible to graduate the altimeter to read the 
height if we assume certain definite conditions of temperature. If these con- 
ditions are not fulfilled in practice, then the altimeter cannot read the correct 
height. Altimeters were at one time graduated on the assumption that the tem- 
perature remained the same at all heights. We have already seen that such an 
assumption is very far from the truth, and the resulting error may be as much 
as 900 m at 9000 m, the altimeter reading too high owing to the drop in tem- 
perature. Altimeters are now calibrated on the assumption that the 
37 
AIR AND AIRFLOW -- SUBSONIC SPEEDS 
temperature drops in accordance with the International Standard Atmosphere; 
this method reduces the error considerably, although the reading will still be 
incorrect where standard conditions do not obtain. 
As a barometer the altimeter will be affected by changes in the pressure of 
the atmosphere, and therefore an adjustment is provided, so that the scale can 
be set (either to zero or to the height of the airfield above sea-level) before the 
commencement of a flight, but in spite of this precaution, atmospheric con- 
ditions may change during the flight, and it is quite possible that on landing 
on the same airfield the altimeter will read too high if the pressure has dropped 
in the meantime, or too low if the pressure has risen. 
Although it is convenient to use SI units for calculations and numerical 
examples, it should be remembered that knots and feet are still the inter- 
nationally approved units for speed and altitude respectively when dealing 
with aircraft operations. If you ever sit at the controls of an aircraft you will 
almost certainly find that the altimeter is calibrated in feet. We shall therefore 
use feet (ft) when referring to this instrument. 
Modern altimeters are much more sensitive than the old types; some, 
instead of having one pointer, may have as many as three, and these are geared 
together like the hands of a clock so that the longest pointer makes one revol- 
ution in 1000 ft, the next one in 10 000 ft, and the smallest one in 100 000 ft. 
Unfortunately this has sometimes proved 'too much of a good thing,' and acci- 
dents have been caused by pilots mistaking one hand for another. The more 
modern tendency is to show the height level in actual figures in addition to one 
or more pointers. But, like a sensitive watch, the altimeter is of little use unless 
it can be made free from error, and can be read correctly. In the modern types, 
if the pilot sets the altimeter to read zero height, which he can do simply by 
turning a knob, a small opening on the face of the instrument discloses the 
pressure of the air at that height -- in other words, the reading of the barom- 
eter. Conversely -- and this is the important point -- if, while in the air, he finds 
out by radio the barometric pressure at the airfield at which he wishes to land, 
he can adjust the instrument so that this pressure shows in the small opening, 
and he can then be sure that his altimeter is reading the correct height above 
that aerodrome, and that when he 'touches down' it will read zero. The 
altimeter may be used in this way for instrument flying and night flying, that 
is to say when the height above the ground in the vicinity of the aerodrome is 
of vital importance, but for ordinary cross-country flying during the day it 
may be preferable to set the sea-level atmospheric pressure in the opening. 
Then the pilot will always know his height above sea-level and can compare 
this with the height, as shown on the map, of the ground over which he is 
flying. If this method is used, instead of the altimeter reading zero on landing, 
it will give the height of the aerodrome above sea-level. There is, however, a 
snag in this method in that the sea-level atmospheric pressure varies from 
place to place and so different pilots may set their altimeters differently, 
thereby increasing the risk of collision; for this reason modern practice for 
flying above 3000 ft is to set the altimeter to standard sea-level pressure of 
38 MECHANICS OF FLIGHT 
1013.2 mb, which means, in effect, that all the altimeters may be reading the 
incorrect height, but that only aircraft flying at the same height can have the 
same altimeter readings. Above 3000 ft heights are referred to in terms of 
flight levels (or hundreds of feet), e.g. FL 35 is 3500 ft, FL 40 is 4000 ft, then 
FL 45, 50, 55, and so on. Increases in flight levels are in fives because of the 
quadrantal system (in operation in the UK) which determines the height at 
which the pilot must fly for specific compass headings. 
The question of altimeter setting has long been a matter for controversy 
among pilots -- and even among nations. 
In recent years there have been radical changes in aircraft instruments and 
displays. Instead of individual instruments there may now be a computer- 
screen type of display, but the altimeter display still looks quite similar to the 
traditional instrument. The information on which the display is based may 
also still be the external pressure, but there are now alternative, more accurate, 
height-reading devices such as radio or radar altimeters. 
The reader who is particularly interested in altimeters and other instru- 
ments is referred to Aircraft Instruments by E. H. J. Pallett, a companion 
volume in the Introduction to Aeronautical Engineering Series. 
Bernoulli's equation 
An aircraft flying through the air causes local changes in both velocity relative 
to the aircraft and pressure. These changes are linked by Bernoulli's equation. 
This equation can be written in many forms, but originally it was given by 
gz a constant 
where z is the height, p is the pressure, r is the density, V is the flow speed, and 
g is the gravity constant. 
The equation is sometimes called Bernoulli's integral, because it is obtained 
by integrating the Euler momentum equation for the case of a fluid with con- 
stant density. Since the equation involves a constant density, it should really 
only be applied to incompressible fluids. Completely incompressible fluids do 
not actually exist, although liquids are very difficult to compress. Air is defi- 
nitely compressible, but nevertheless, airflow calculations using Bernoulli's 
equation give good answers unless the speed of the flow starts going above 
about half the speed of sound. Bernoulli's equation will also not apply in 
regions where viscosity is important. 
The terms in this equation all have the units of energy per unit mass, and 
the equation looks temptingly similar to the steady flow energy equation that 
you will meet if you ever study thermodynamics. The second and third terms 
do in fact represent kinetic energy per unit mass and potential energy per unit 
V2 
2 
p 
39 
AIR AND AIRFLOW -- SUBSONIC SPEEDS 
mass respectively. The true energy equation is, however, significantly different, 
and contains an important extra term, internal energy, which cannot be neg- 
lected in compressible airflows. However, whatever Bernoulli's equation is or 
is not, it remains a useful and simple means for getting approximately correct 
answers for low-speed flows. Aerodynamicists usually prefer it in the form 
below: 
p  V2  gz aconstant 
This is obtained by multiplying the original equation by the density, which 
makes all of the terms come out in the units of pressure (N/m2). The last term 
is usually ignored because changes in height are small in most of the calcula- 
tions that we perform for airflows around an aircraft, so we write 
p  V2 aconstant 
The first term represents the local pressure of the air, and is called the static 
pressure. The second term rV2 is associated with the flow speed and is called 
dynamic pressure. For convenience it is sometimes represented by the letter q, 
but in this book we will use the full expression. 
If we ignore the third term, as above, Bernoulli's equation says that adding 
the first two terms, the static and the dynamic pressure, produces a constant 
result. Therefore, if the flow is slowed down so that the dynamic pressure 
decreases, then to keep the equation in balance the static pressure must 
increase. If we bring the flow to rest at some point, then the pressure must 
reach its highest possible value, because the dynamic pressure becomes zero. 
This maximum value is called the stagnation pressure because it occurs at a 
point where the air has stopped or become stagnant. Using the version of 
Bernoulli's equation above, we can write 
p  V2 a constant p (stagnation) 0 
This gives the important result that 
Static pressure Dynamic pressure Stagnation pressure 
Air speed measurement 
Bernoulli's equation gives rise to a simple method of measuring air speed. You 
can see that the dynamic pressure is related to the density and the speed, 
(dynamic pressure rV2), so if we could measure the dynamic pressure and 
the density we could determine the speed. Fortunately there is a very simple 
way of measuring the dynamic pressure at least. 
12 
12 
12 
12 
12 
40 MECHANICS OF FLIGHT 
If we point a tube directly into the flow of air, and connect the other end to 
a pressure-measuring device, then that device will read the stagnation pressure. 
The reason for this is that the tube is full of air and its exit is blocked, so no 
air can flow down the tube; the oncoming air therefore is brought to rest rela- 
tive to the tube as it meets the open end of the tube. This type of tube is called 
a pitot tube and provides a means of measuring stagnation pressure. A dif- 
ferent result is obtained if we make a hole in the side of a wind tunnel or in 
the fuselage of an aircraft, and connect this via a tube to a pressure-measuring 
device. The hole will not impede the flow of air, so the pressure measured will 
be the local static pressure. A hole used for this purpose is called a static vent 
or tapping. Since static pressure plus dynamic pressure equals stagnation 
pressure as shown above, it follows that 
Stagnation pressure Static pressure Dynamic pressure 
If instead of connecting the static pressure vent and the pitot tube to two sep- 
arate pressure-measuring devices, we connect them across one device which 
measures the difference in pressure then, from the above expression, we can 
see that we will obtain a measurement of the dynamic pressure. Thus we have 
a simple means of measuring the dynamic pressure, and if only we could find 
a way of measuring or assessing the density, we could determine the flow 
speed, but more of this later; let us first concentrate on the measurement of 
dynamic pressure, which we will show is actually just as important to the pilot 
as the speed. 
The pressure difference measuring device used on aircraft consists of either 
a diaphragm or a capsule (similar to the type used in an aneroid barometer). 
The stagnation pressure is applied to one side, and the static pressure is 
applied to the other. The resulting deflection of the diaphragm can then either 
be amplified through a series of levers to cause a dial pointer to move, as on 
older mechanical devices, or can be used to produce a proportional electrical 
output to be fed into an appropriate electronic circuit. This instrument thus 
gives a reading that is proportional to the dynamic pressure, but as we shall 
see, it forms the basis of the air speed indicator. 
The pitot tube and static pressure hole are located at a suitable convenient 
position on the aircraft. The location of the static tapping is very important 
because it is essential to choose a position where the local static pressure is 
about the same as that in the free stream away from the aircraft. We need, 
therefore, to find a place where the flow speed is about the same as that in the 
free stream, and also is not too sensitive to change in the direction that the air- 
craft is pointing. The pitot and static holes are normally heated to avoid icing 
at low temperatures. 
As an alternative to using separate pitot and static tubes, it is possible to use 
a combined device called the pitot-static tube which is illustrated in Fig. 2.5. 
The pitot-static tube consists of two concentric tubes. The inner one is simply 
a pitot tube, but the outer one is sealed at the front and has small holes in the 
41 
AIR AND AIRFLOW -- SUBSONIC SPEEDS 
side to sense the static pressure. The pitot-static tube is a very convenient 
device, and by mounting it on the wingtips or the nose it can be arranged so 
that it is well clear of interference from the flow around the aircraft. Pitot- 
static tubes are always used for accurate speed measurement on prototypes, 
but for civil and private aircraft separate pitot and static tappings are normally 
used. Pitot-static tubes are frequently used in wind tunnels. 
The air speed indicator 
As stated above, the pitot and static tube combination provides a means of 
measuring the dynamic pressure. It does not tell us the speed directly, but we 
can work out the speed if we know the density. Until recently, there was no 
simple method of measuring density, so all that could be done was to use the 
dynamic pressure-measuring device described above, and mark on the dial the 
speed that this dynamic pressure would correspond to at standard sea-level air 
density. This instrument is called the Air Speed Indicator (ASI). You will see 
that since the instrument is calibrated assuming the standard sea-level value of 
air density, it does not give the true speed, unless the aircraft is flying at a 
height where the density just happens to be equal to the standard sea-level 
value. 
Nowadays, there are devices which can measure the true air speed, but the 
air speed indicator described above is still an important item on any instru- 
ment panel. This is because the lift and other forces on the aircraft are 
dependent on dynamic pressure, and the air speed indicator gives a reading 
which is directly related to dynamic pressure. For example, if the dynamic 
pressure is too small, the wings will not be able to generate enough lift to keep 
the aircraft in steady level flight. The value of the dynamic pressure and hence 
the indicated speed at which this occurs will always be the same whatever the 
height. The pilot just has to remember to keep above this minimum indicated 
speed. If the pilot had only a true speed indicator, he would have to know what 
the minimum speed was at every height. 
42 MECHANICS OF FLIGHT 
Pressure 
tube 
Static 
tube 
To static 
chamber 
Small holes 
in static tube 
To pressure 
chamber 
Airflow 
Fig 2.5 Concentric pitot-static tube 
Air speed indicator corrections 
The speed indicated by the air speed indicator is called the Air Speed Indictor 
Reading (ASIR). There are several sources of error in this reading. Firstly, the 
instrument itself may not have been calibrated correctly, or may be suffering 
from some wear. This error is called instrument error. By recalibrating the 
instrument it is possible to determine what the correction should be at every 
indicated speed. The speed corrected for instrument error is called the 
Indicated Air Speed (IAS). There will also be errors due to the positioning of 
the pitot and static tubes on the aircraft. It is virtually impossible to find a pos- 
ition where the static pressure is always exactly the same as the pressure in the 
free airstream away from the aircraft. To determine the correction for such 
position errors, the aircraft can be flown in formation with another aircraft 
with specially calibrated instruments. Once the position error correction has 
been applied, the speed is known as the Calibrated Air Speed (CAS). Finally, 
for any aircraft that can fly faster than about 200 mph, it is necessary to apply 
a correction for compressibility, since Bernoulli's equation only applies to low- 
speed effectively incompressible flows. 
After all the corrections have been applied, the resulting speed is called the 
Equivalent Air Speed (EAS). Once the equivalent air speed has been obtained it 
is quite easy to estimate the True Air Speed (TAS) which is required for navi- 
gation purposes. For a light piston-engined aircraft, the corrections will be 
relatively small, and for simple navigational estimates, the pilot can assume that 
the speed read from his instrument the ASIR is roughly the same as the equiv- 
alent air speed EAS. The procedure for calculating the true air speed is as follows. 
Suppose that at 6000 m the air speed indicator reads 204 knots, i.e. 105 m/s. 
Ignoring any instrument or position errors, this means that the pressure on the 
pitot tube is the same as would be produced by a speed of 105 m/s at standard 
sea-level density of 1.225 kg/m3; but this pressure is rV2, i.e. 1/2 1.225 
105 105. 
Now according to the International Standard Atmosphere the air density at 
6000 m is 0.66 kg/m3, and if the true air speed is V m/s, then the pressure on 
the pitot tube will be 1/2 0.66 V2, which must be the same as 
1/2 1.226 105 105 
so 
0.66V2 1.226 1052 
or 
V  1.226/0.66 105 1.36 105 
142.8 m/s. 
12 
43 
AIR AND AIRFLOW -- SUBSONIC SPEEDS 
Thus the indicated air speed is 105 m/s, and the true air speed approximately 
143 m/s. 
Note that, expressed in symbols, the true air speed (TAS) is the equivalent 
air speed (EAS) divided by the square root of the relative density (s), or 
TAS EAS/  s 
A similar calculation for 12 200 m will reveal the interesting result that at that 
height the true air speed is slightly more than double the indicated air speed! 
We have said that the instrument indicated air speed may sometimes be 
more useful to the pilot that the true air speed. For purposes of navigation, 
however, he must estimate his speed over the ground, and with traditional 
navigation methods, he must first determine the true air speed, then make cor- 
rections to allow for the speed of the atmospheric wind relative to the ground. 
The true air speed can be determined using the procedure above, but to do this 
we need to know the air density or the relative density. This can be obtained 
by using the altimeter reading, and tables for the variation of relative density 
in the ISA. In practice, as an alternative to calculations, the pilot can use tables 
showing the relationship between true air speed and indicated air speed at dif- 
ferent heights in ISA conditions. 
For high-speed aircraft, the indicated air speed has to be corrected for com- 
pressibility, and to do this we need a further instrument, one that indicates the 
speed relative to the local speed of sound. This instrument is called a machmeter. 
However, we are again trying to run before we can walk, and we will leave the 
treatment of compressible flow to later chapters. 
Nowadays navigation has been revolutionised by the introduction of 
ground-based radio, and satellite navigation systems which can give very accu- 
rate indications of position and speed relative to the ground. Despite these 
advances, however, aspiring pilots still have to learn the traditional methods 
of navigation in order to qualify for their licence. Old instruments like the air 
speed indicator and the altimeter are simple and reliable, and will not break 
down in the event of an electrical failure or a violent thunderstorm. Even on 
the most advanced modern airliners, an old mechanical air speed indicator and 
pressure altimeter are fitted, and will continue to work even if all the electrical 
systems have failed. 
The venturi tube 
One of the most interesting examples of Bernoulli's Theorem is provided by 
the venturi tube (Fig. 2.6). This simple but effective instrument is nothing but 
a tube which gradually narrows to a throat, and then expands even more 
gradually to the exit. Its effectiveness as a means of causing a decrease of 
pressure below that of the atmosphere depends very much on the exact shape. 
44 MECHANICS OF FLIGHT 
If a photograph is taken, or a diagram made, of the flow of air or water 
through a venturi tube, it will be observed that the streamlines are closest 
together at the throat, and this gives an unfortunate impression that the fluid 
has been compressed at this point. Such an impression is the last thing we want 
to convey, and what we would like to be able to do is to show a video, or, 
better still, an actual experiment, which would make it quite clear that while 
it is true that the streamlines are closer together at the throat, the velocity of 
flow is also higher. This is the important point: the dynamic pressure has gone 
up and therefore, in accordance with Bernoulli's principle, the static pressure 
has gone down. If a tube is taken from the throat and connected to a U-tube 
containing water, the suction will be clearly shown. 
An interesting experiment with a venturi tube is to place an ordinary pitot 
tube (without a static) facing the airflow at various positions in the tube. 
Connect the pitot tube to a U-tube, and leave the other side of the U-tube open 
to the atmospheric pressure outside the air stream. The pitot tube will record 
r rV2, i.e. the static pressure in the stream plus the dynamic pressure, and 
the U-tube will therefore show the difference between this and the atmospheric 
pressure outside the stream. It will be found that r rV2 is very nearly con- 
stant, whether the pitot tube is placed in the free air stream in front of the 
venturi, or in the mouth, or the throat, or near the exit. This is a convincing 
proof of Bernoulli's Theorem. The air speed increases from mouth to throat 
and then decreases again to the exit. The air speed increases very nearly in the 
same proportion as the area of cross-section of the venturi decreases, and this 
suggests that there is little or no change in the density of the air. Even more 
convincing evidence that the density does not change is provided by the flow 
of water through a venturi tube; the pattern of flow and the results obtained 
are very similar to those in air, and we know that water is for all practical pur- 
poses incompressible. 
There are many practical examples of the venturi tube in everyday life, but 
there is no need to quote them, because we have sufficient examples in flying 
to illustrate this important principle. The choke tube in a carburettor is one; a 
wind tunnel is another, the experiments usually being done in the high-speed 
12 
12 
45 
AIR AND AIRFLOW -- SUBSONIC SPEEDS 
High-speed flow 
decreased pressure 
Tube to suction 
chamber 
Flow speeding up 
pressure decreasing 
Flow slowing down 
pressure increasing 
Fig 2.6 Flow through venturi tube 
flow at the throat, and the air speed at this point is often measured by a single 
static hole in the side of the tunnel. A small venturi may be fitted inside a larger 
one, and the suction at the throat of the small venturi is then sufficient to drive 
gyroscopic instruments. 
Air resistance or drag 
Whenever a body is moved through air, or other viscous fluid, a definite resist- 
ance to its motion is produced. In aeronautical work this resistance is usually 
referred to as drag. 
Drag is the enemy of flight, and efforts must be made to reduce the resistance 
of every part of an aeroplane to a minimum, provided strength and other essen- 
tial factors can be maintained. For this reason many thousands of experiments 
have been carried out to investigate the problems of air resistance; in fact, in 
this, as in almost every branch of the subject, our knowledge is founded mainly 
on the mean result of accumulated experimental data. Nowadays, however, 
there are increasingly more accurate theoretical methods of estimating drag. 
Streamlines and form drag 
Lines which show the direction of the flow of the fluid at any particular 
moment are called streamlines. A body so shaped as to produce the least poss- 
ible resistance is said to be of streamline shape. 
We may divide the resistance of a body passing through a fluid into two 
parts -- 
1 Form drag or Pressure drag 
2 Skin friction or Surface friction 
These two between them form a large part of the total drag of an aeroplane -- 
in the high subsonic range, the major part. The sum of the two is sometimes 
called profile drag but this term will be avoided since it is apt to give an 
impression of being another name for form drag, whereas it really includes 
skin friction. 
The total drag of an aeroplane is sometimes divided in another way in 
which the drag of the wings or lifting surfaces, wing drag, is separated from 
the drag of those parts which do not contribute towards the lift, the drag of 
the latter being called parasite drag. Figure 2A illustrates an old type of aero- 
plane in which parasite drag formed a large part of the total. Figure 2B 
(overleaf) tells another story. 
46 MECHANICS OF FLIGHT 
1. Form Drag. This is the portion of the resistance which is due to the fact 
that when a viscous fluid flows past a body, the pressure on the forward-facing 
part is on average higher than that on the rearward-facing portion. The 
extreme example of this type of resistance is a flat plate placed at right angles 
to the wind. The resistance is very large and almost entirely due to the pressure 
difference between the front and rear faces, the skin friction being negligible 
in comparison (Fig. 2.7). 
Experiments show that not only is the pressure in front of the plate greater 
than the atmospheric pressure, but that the pressure behind is less than that of 
the atmosphere, causing a kind of 'sucking' effect on the plate. 
47 
AIR AND AIRFLOW -- SUBSONIC SPEEDS 
Fig 2A Parasite drag A flying replica of the Vickers Vimy bomber which was 
the first aeroplane to make a non-stop flight across the Atlantic (in 1919). The 
extensive use of bracing wires and struts creates a great deal of parasite drag. 
Direction 
of airflow 
Fig 2.7 Form drag 
It is essential that form drag should be reduced to a minimum in all those 
parts of the aeroplane which are exposed to the air. This can be done by so 
shaping them that the flow of air past them is as smooth as possible, and much 
experimental work has been carried out with this in view. The results show the 
enormous advantage to be gained by the streamlining of all exposed parts; in 
fact, the figures obtained are so remarkable that they are difficult to believe 
without a practical demonstration. At a conservative estimate it can be said that 
a round tube has not much more than half the resistance of a flat plate, while 
if the tube is converted into the best possible streamline shape the resistance will 
be only one-tenth that of the round tube or one-twentieth that of the flat plate 
(Fig. 2.8). 
The streamline shapes which have given the least resistance at subsonic 
speeds have had a fineness ratio -- i.e. a/b -- of between 3 and 4 (see Fig. 2.9), 
and the maximum value of b should be about one-third of the way back from 
the nose. These dimensions, however, may vary considerably without 
increasing the resistance to any great extent. 
48 MECHANICS OF FLIGHT 
Resistance, 100% 
Resistance, 50% 
Resistance, 15% 
Resistance, 5% 
Fig 2.8 Effect of streamlining 
a 
b 
Fig 2.9 Fineness ratio 
Fig 2B Streamlining 
(By courtesy of the former British Aircraft Corporation) 
Concorde 002 in contrast to the Vickers Vimy of Fig. 2A 
49 
AIR AND AIRFLOW -- SUBSONIC SPEEDS 
It should be mentioned that although we now have a fair idea of the ideal 
shape for any separate body, it by no means follows that two bodies of this 
shape -- e.g. a fuselage and a wing -- will give the least resistance when joined 
together. 
Skin friction and boundary layer 
Another consideration is that as we decrease the form drag the skin friction 
becomes of comparatively greater importance. 
2. Skin Friction. Air is slowed up, and brought to a standstill, very close to 
a surface. If there is dust on an aeroplane wing before flight, it is usually still 
there after flight. The layers of air near the surface retard the layers farther 
away -- owing to the friction between them, i.e. the viscosity -- and so there is 
a gradual increase in velocity as the distance from the surface increases (Fig. 
2.10). The distance above the plate in which the velocity regains a value close 
to that of the free stream may be no more than a few millimetres over a wing. 
The layer or layers of air in which the shearing action takes place, that is to 
say between the surface and the full velocity of the airflow, is called the 
boundary layer. Owing to the great importance of skin friction, and necessity 
of keeping it within reasonable limits, particularly at high speed, much patient 
research work has been devoted to the study of the boundary layer. 
Now the boundary layer, like the main airflow, may be either laminar or 
turbulent (Figs 2.11 and 2C), and the difference that these two types of flow 
make to the total skin friction is of the same order as the effect of streamlining 
50 MECHANICS OF FLIGHT 
This layer slowed up by layer below 
This layer slowed up by layer above 
Airflow slowed up by surface 
Airflow slowed up by surface 
This layer slowed up by layer below 
This layer slowed up by layer above 
Fig 2.10 Skin friction 
51 
AIR AND AIRFLOW -- SUBSONIC SPEEDS 
the main flow. It has been stated that if we could ensure a laminar boundary 
layer over the whole surface of a wing the skin friction would be reduced to 
about one-tenth of its value. 
The turbulent layer is characterised by high frequency eddies superimposed 
on the average velocity at each distance from the surface, while in the laminar 
case the 'layers' of air flow smoothly over each other. The turbulent layer, 
other factors being equal, has a much higher degree of shear at the surface, and 
it is this which causes the skin friction to be much higher than it is for the 
Fig 2C Investigating the boundary layer 
(By courtesy of the former British Aircraft Corporation, Preston) 
Wool tufts on model of a fuselage 
Thickness of 
boundary 
layer 
Full velocity 
of airflow 
Full velocity 
of airflow 
Surface 
of body 
Thickness
(a) Laminar 
(b) Turbulent 
Fig. 2.11 Laminar and turbulent boundary layer 
Thickness of layer greatly exaggerated 
laminar boundary layer. A smooth surface encourages a laminar layer, 
although other factors such as viscosity and the flow speed are also important. 
A smooth surface is also important when the boundary layer is turbulent as in 
this case the skin friction is reduced by a high degree of surface finish, although 
it remains considerably above the laminar value. 
The usual tendency is for the boundary layer to start by being laminar near 
the leading edge of a body, but there comes a point, called the transition point, 
when the layer tends to become turbulent and thicker (Fig. 2.12). As the speed 
increases the transition point tends to move further forward, so more of the 
boundary layer is turbulent and the skin friction greater. 
If this much is understood it will be obvious that the purpose of much 
research work has been to discover how the transition point moves forward, 
and how its movement can be controlled so as to maintain laminar flow over 
as much of the surface as possible. 
But a further complication is that the behaviour of the boundary layer is 
very dependent on the size of an aerofoil (scale affect); this affects its relative 
thickness, whether it is laminar or turbulent, and how soon it separates from 
the surface. This is very important in wind tunnel testing which is discussed 
later. First let us look at how we can represent the drag produced by skin fric- 
tion and separation. 
Drag coefficient 
Experiments show that, within certain limitations, it is true to say that the 
total resistance of a body passing through the air is dependent on the following 
factors -- 
(a) The shape of the body. 
(b) The frontal area of the body. 
(c) The square of the velocity. 
(d) The density of the air. 
Of these the velocity squared law is not strictly true at any speed and is defi- 
nitely untrue at very low and very high speeds: when the speeds are low, 
52 MECHANICS OF FLIGHT 
Thin laminar 
boundary layer 
Thicker turbulent 
boundary layer 
Transition point 
Fig 2.12 Transition point 
matters are complicated by the way in which the boundary layer develops and, 
at high speeds, by the fact that the air may be compressed. 
It is sometimes thought that the air is compressed in front of a body that is 
moving quite slowly through the air. We know that air is compressible but this 
does not come into play at speeds well below the speed of sound; at such 
speeds air behaves very like an almost incompressible liquid such as water. The 
passage of sound is, of course, caused by compression in the air, and it is only 
when speeds are reached in the neighbourhood of the speed of sound, about 
340 m/s (661 knots), that appreciable compression of the air begins to take 
place. High-speed aircraft fly in this region, and beyond it. It is also interesting 
to note that the speed at which sound travels depends on the temperature of 
the air and becomes appreciably less at high altitudes, and thus the problem of 
reaching this critical velocity has become an important consideration in high- 
altitude flying. In such conditions there may be considerable departure from 
the velocity squared law, but for the low subsonic speeds -- say, from 15 to 
150 m/s -- this law can be taken as accurate enough for practical purposes, so 
that double the speed means four times the resistance. As regards frontal area, 
when we are considering bodies of very different dimensions we must 
remember the scale effect to which we have already referred; we should also 
notice that, if we have a one-fifth scale model of a body, the frontal area of the 
full-sized body will be twenty-five times that of the model. 
The term 'frontal area' means the maximum projected area when viewed in the 
direction of normal motion, so the frontal area of an aircraft is the maximum 
cross-sectional area when viewed from the front. In some instances the surface 
area would be a more sensible area to take -- no general rule can be laid down, and 
the student should remember that the chief object of experiments on resistance is 
to compare the resistance of bodies of a similar kind. We are not very much con- 
cerned with how the resistance of a wing compares with the resistance of a wheel, 
but we do wish to compare the resistance of wings of different sizes and shapes, 
and also the resistances of different types of wheels. Therefore, if we choose one 
method to measure the area of wings and another to measure the area of wheels 
(as indeed we do), it does not matter very much. We must, however, agree on 
which reference area we are using in a particular case if we are to compare results 
sensibly. It is all a question of convenience. We shall return to this when we look 
at the lift, drag and pitching moments of an aerofoil in the next chapter. 
The law of the variation of the resistance with the density of the air is found 
to be very nearly correct at ordinary densities, and on first thoughts points to 
the advantages of flight at high altitudes. 
Assuming (a), (b), (c) and (d) to be true, we can express the result by the 
following formula for bodies of the same shape -- 
R arV2SF 
rV2 looks suspiciously like the dynamic pressure, rV2, and it is, perhaps, not 
surprising that the force generated by the air stream depends on this quantity. 
12 
53 
AIR AND AIRFLOW -- SUBSONIC SPEEDS 
The general formula for air resistance, or drag, can thus be written as -- 
R CD rV2SF 
where CD is a coefficient (known as the drag coefficient), which depends on 
the shape of the body and is found by experiment; r represents the density of 
the air, SF the frontal area of the body, and V the velocity. 
The units in this formula will correspond to those adopted in Chapter 1, i.e. 
the resistance (R) will be in newtons, the density (r) in kilograms per cubic 
metre, the area (SF) in square metres, velocity (V) in metres per second and the 
drag coefficient (CD) merely a number. 
From this formula we can estimate the resistance of bodies moving through 
the air, provided we know the value of CD for the particular shape concerned. 
This is usually found by experiment and, in the absence of more accurate 
information, the following values may be used -- 
for a flat plate CD 1.2 (normal to the flow direction) 
for a circular tube CD 0.6 (axis normal to the flow direction) 
for a streamline strut CD 0.06 
EXAMPLE 10.1 
Find the resistance of a flat plate, 15 cm by 10 cm, placed at right angles to an 
airflow of velocity 90 km/h. (Assume sea-level air density of 1.225 kg/m3.) 
SOLUTION 
Data: CD 1.2 
r 1.225 kg/m3 
V  90km/h 25m/s 
SF 15x10 150cm2 0.015m2 
Resistance CD rV2SF 1.2 0.5 1.225 25 25 0.015 6.89N 
Although we have so far applied this formula to resistance only, it is really of 
far wider application; it can, in fact, be used to represent any force and, with 
a small modification, moment, produced by the flow of air and the reader will 
be well advised to be sure that he understands just what it means. Therefore, 
let us sum up the position by saying that the aerodynamic drag experienced by 
any body depends on the shape of the body (represented by the coefficient CD 
in the formula), the dynamic pressure of the air when it is of the given density 
and flowing at the given velocity (represented by rV2), and the size of the 
body, in this case given by the frontal area (represented by SF). 
We can base our coefficient on areas other than SF, if this is more convenient; 
this we shall do in the next chapter, when we look at the forces and moments 
produced by an aerofoil. If we change the reference area, though, CD will have 
to be correspondingly changed to keep the total resistance at the correct value; 
so we must agree on which reference area we are using in each case. 
12 
1 
2 
1 
2 
54 MECHANICS OF FLIGHT 
Wind tunnels 
Because it is difficult to predict the forces on an aircraft (especially drag) with 
sufficient precision, scale models must be tested using wind tunnels to provide 
the necessary information. 
In experimental work it is usual to allow the fluid to flow past the body 
rather than to move the body through the fluid. The former method has the 
great advantage that the body is at rest, and consequently the measurement 
of any forces upon it is comparatively simple. Furthermore, since we are only 
concerned with the relative motion of the body and the fluid, the true facts of 
the case are fully reproduced provided we can obtain a flow of the fluid which 
would be as steady as the corresponding motion of the body through the 
fluid. 
Many experiments are carried out on models in wind tunnels. There are 
several types of tunnel, but probably the most commonly used is the closed 
working-section, closed-return type shown in Figs 2.13 and 2E (overleaf). The 
model is placed in the narrow working section and air enters through a con- 
traction. The contraction makes the airflow speed in the working section more 
uniform, and also higher than in the rest of the circuit. Having a high flow 
speed in the whole circuit would increase the energy losses due to friction. The 
term closed-return refers to the fact that the air flows round in a complete 
circuit. 
As an alternative, open circuit tunnels are sometimes used. In these, only the 
working section contraction and fan sections are required as illustrated in Fig. 
2.14 (overleaf). The air is simply sucked in from the atmosphere through the 
contraction to the working section, and then exhausted back into the atmos- 
phere, rather like a large vacuum cleaner. The advantage of the open-return 
type of tunnel is that it takes up much less space, and costs less than a closed- 
return type. The principal disadvantages are that dust is drawn in, and the 
55 
AIR AND AIRFLOW -- SUBSONIC SPEEDS 
Guide vanes 
Working section 
Fan 
Motor 
Contraction 
Diffuser 
Model Balance Supports 
Fig 2.13 A closed working-section closed return wind tunnel 
flow may be sensitive to external disturbances. Also, the pressure in the 
working section must be lower than atmospheric, since the air is drawn in 
from the atmosphere and speeded up. This means that any small leaks around 
the working section will pull in a jet of air. This type of tunnel is frequently 
used in college and university laboratories. 
56 MECHANICS OF FLIGHT 
Fig 2D A small open jet wind tunnel 
This type of tunnel is useful for teaching purposes, as the model is readily 
accessible. Though not often used for aeronautical applications these days, 
the open jet tunnel has found some favour for road vehicle aerodynamic 
testing. 
Fig 2E Wind tunnel with return circuit (opposite) 
(By courtesy of the Lockheed Aircraft Corporation, USA) 
The Lockheed-Georgia subsonic closed-throat wind tunnel. Length of 
centre line 238 m. Mechanical balances measure lift, drag, side force and 
pitching, rolling and yawing moments. 6710 kW electric motor drives fan 
of 12 m diameter. 
Working 
section 
Fan Motor 
Diffuser 
Model 
Intake 
contraction Honeycomb 
or gauze 
Fig 2.14 A simple open return tunnel 
57 
AIR AND AIRFLOW -- SUBSONIC SPEEDS 
Another type of tunnel that is sometimes employed is the open jet type illus- 
trated in Figs 2D (earlier) and 2.15. In this type of tunnel the working section 
is not enclosed, which gives it its main advantage, accessibility. For teaching 
purposes, the open working section is particularly useful, and this type of 
tunnel is also popular for automotive aerodynamic studies where the effects of 
wall constraint are less predictable than for aircraft. There are other types of 
tunnel such as the slotted wall, but let us not confuse ourselves with such sub- 
tleties at this stage. 
Other common types of tunnel are of course the supersonic and transonic, 
but these are described later in the book, after compressible flow has been 
explained. 
Wind-tunnel balances 
To measure the forces exerted by the airflow, the model is normally mounted on 
to a balance which may be a mechanical or an electrical type. The older mech- 
anical force balance is rather like a simple weighing machine of the type used to 
weigh babies or patients in a hospital. As illustrated in Fig. 2.16, the force to be 
measured (such as the lift on the model) is applied via a series of levers and 
58 MECHANICS OF FLIGHT 
Fig 2.15 An open jet tunnel 
Pivot 
Scale 
Jockey weight 
Vertical 
weight minus 
lift force 
Oil dashpot 
damper 
Horizontal 
drag force 
Fig 2.16 A simple balance 
pivots or flexures to an arm upon which is placed a jockey weight. The moment 
of the applied force is balanced by moving the jockey weight along the arm. The 
position of the jockey weight therefore indicates the magnitude of the force. The 
further along the arm the jockey weight has to be moved, the greater is the force 
being balanced. The same principle is used to measure horizontal drag or thrust 
forces, as shown in Fig. 2.16. One arm has to be used for each of the three forces 
and three moments that make up the six 'components' illustrated in Fig. 2.17. 
In small college tunnels it is normal to have only three arms which measure the 
three most important components, lift, drag and pitching moment. The design 
of the levers and pivots is very complicated because it is important that a change 
in the vertical lift force does not affect the arm that is supposed to measure only 
the horizontal drag force. The balance unit which is large is situated outside the 
tunnel, and the model is attached to it by means of a number of rods or wires 
(see Fig. 2D, earlier). Originally the jockey weights were moved by hand, but 
nowadays they can either be moved automatically by a servo electric motor, or 
are left fixed, with the force of the arm being measured by an electrical force 
transducer. A force transducer is an instrument that produces an electrical 
output that is proportional to the applied force. This brings us to the second 
form of balance, the electronic type. 
The electronic force balance consists of a carefully machined block of metal 
that is attached to the model at one end and to a supporting structure at the 
other; this often takes the form of a single rod or 'sting' protruding from the rear 
of the model. Electrical resistance strain gauges attached to the block produce 
output voltages proportional to the applied forces. Up to six components can be 
measured. This type of balance is very small and compact and is normally con- 
tained within the model. One potential disadvantage is that there is usually a 
certain amount of unwanted interference between the different components; 
changes in lift affect the drag reading, etc. However, the computer-based data 
acquisition systems to which such balances are invariably attached are able to 
make corrections and allowances automatically. 
59 
AIR AND AIRFLOW -- SUBSONIC SPEEDS 
Lift 
Drag 
Yawing moment 
Rolling moment 
Pitching moment 
Side force 
Fig 2.17 The six 'components' 
Measuring pressure 
We can measure the pressure on the model surface by connecting flexible tubes 
between small holes (pressure tappings) drilled in the surface and a suitable 
pressure-measuring device. A simple way to measure the pressure is to use a 
liquid-filled tube U-tube (Fig 2.18). If the pressure in the tube, connected to the 
hole in the model, is lower than atmospheric, the liquid level will rise; rather 
like sucking a drink up a straw. If the pressure is higher than atmospheric (as 
in Fig 2.18), the liquid will be pushed further down the tube, like blowing 
down the straw. 
The idea is quite simple. The column of liquid between A and B is sup- 
ported by the difference between the test pressure and atmospheric pressure, 
which produces an upward force on the column equal to the weight of the 
liquid between A and B. As we saw for the liquid column in Chapter 1, the 
upward force is equal to the pressure difference multiplied by the cross-sec- 
tional area of the tube. This balances the weight of the liquid, which is equal 
to its density, r, multiplied by the gravitational constant, g, the cross-sectional 
area of the tube and the height of the column, h. 
So what pressure difference is the equivalent to a manometer deflection 
(pressure 'head' -- see Chapter 1) of 1m of water? 
Pressure difference r g h 
So, putting in the values in SI units, we get 
Pressure difference = 1000 9.81 1 9810 N/m2 
60 MECHANICS OF FLIGHT 
atmospheric pressure 
test pressure (connected to model) 
Column of liquid 
supported by 
pressure difference 
h 
A 
B 
Fig 2.18 Measuring pressure 
61 
AIR AND AIRFLOW -- SUBSONIC SPEEDS 
Absolute and gauge pressure 
In the simple U-tube manometer above, the liquid surface at B is left open to 
the atmosphere, so -- 
Pressure difference test pressure -- atmospheric pressure r g h 
Thus -- 
test pressure atmospheric pressure r g h. 
This is known as the absolute pressure. The pressure difference ( r g h) 
simply gives the pressure change relative to atmospheric pressure. In practice 
this relative pressure is all we need to know. As this pressure is the pressure 
obtained directly from the gauge, it has come to be referred to as gauge 
pressure. Sometimes it is convenient to use a different pressure source to act as 
our reference, instead of atmospheric pressure. We can see that -- 
absolute pressure gauge pressure atmospheric (or reference) pressure 
Nowadays it is generally more convenient to use pressure transducers (Fig. 2F) 
to measure the pressure at the tappings. 
Fig. 2F Pressure transducer 
The transducer produces an electrical output that is proportional to the 
pressure being measured and which can be recorded, through a suitable inter- 
face, directly on a computer system. Pressure transducers work in a variety of 
ways. For example, the pressure can be used to deform a diaphragm, which 
has electrical strain gauges attached to it. They can also be purchased in a wide 
variety of sizes and pressure ranges. Some pressure transducers measure the 
pressure relative to a reference source (gauge pressure transducers), others 
measure relative to a sealed vacuum and thus directly measure absolute 
pressure. 
Other wind tunnel measurements 
As well as measuring the forces and pressures on a wind tunnel model, we may 
want to investigate more detailed features of the flow, so that we can improve 
the design of our aircraft. We can do this by measuring the velocity at different 
points in the flow and by using flow visualisation to help us to see what the 
flow is doing. 
One way we can measure speed is to traverse the flow using a miniaturised 
version of the pitot-static tube (Fig 2.5 earlier), although we must be careful 
to line it up with the local flow direction. If we want to measure fluctuations 
in turbulent flow, however, this will not respond fast enough. For this type of 
speed measurement, we can use a hot wire anemometer or a laser Doppler 
anemometer. In the hot wire anemometer a very fine wire is heated electrically. 
The airflow cools the wire and this changes its electrical resistance, which can 
be measured electronically. Because the wire is so fine (about 5 micro-metres 
in diameter) it can measure very rapid fluctuations in airspeed. The laser 
Doppler anemometer (LDA) works by illuminating a very small volume of air 
at the crossing point of two laser beams. The beams interfere with each other 
and produce a series of 'fringes' (dark and light stripes). Particles, which are 
light enough to follow the airstream, are introduced into the flow (seeding) 
and each reflects a pulse of light as it travels through each light fringe. The fre- 
quency of the reflected light is then used to measure the velocity of the particle 
but some very clever signal processing is needed to sort things out when par- 
ticles overlap in the illuminated area or when very large particles come 
through, which are too big to follow the flow. Seeding can also be used to 
measure the velocity in a 'slice' of the flow illuminated by a light sheet. Pictures 
are taken, in quick succession, of particles illuminated by the sheet and their 
velocities are deduced from their changes in position. This is called 'Particle 
Image Velocimetry' (PIV for short). 
Particles in the flow can also be used to make the flow visible. Smoke is 
often used for this. We can also see what the flow is doing on the surface of a 
model by using short wool tufts, stuck to the surface at their upstream ends, 
or by the use of surface oil flow. A common oil flow technique is to mix a 
62 MECHANICS OF FLIGHT 
white powder such as titanium dioxide with kerosene and a few drops of oleic 
acid. After running the wind tunnel the titanium dioxide forms streaks 
showing the pattern of flow on the surface. A note of caution -- oil flow needs 
considerable experience in interpretation as the flow may differ considerably a 
small distance from the surface, outside the boundary layer. 
Sources of error 
Wind tunnel experiments on models, even at subsonic speeds, are liable to three 
main sources of error when used to forecast full-scale results. These are -- 
1. Scale Effect. As mentioned earlier, laws of resistance can be framed which 
apply well to bodies whose sizes are not very different, but these laws become 
less accurate when there is a great difference in size between the model and the 
full scale. A similar effect is noticed when the velocity of the model test differs 
appreciably from the full-scale velocity. 
Corrections can be applied which allow for this 'scale effect' and enable more 
accurate forecasts to be made. Readers who are interested will find an explanation 
of scale effect, and of the advantages of the compressed air tunnel, if they refer to 
Appendix 2. They will also be introduced to the important term Reynolds Number. 
2. Interference from Wind Tunnel Walls (Fig. 2.19). The second error is due 
to the fact that in the wind tunnel the air stream is confined to the limits of the 
tunnel, whereas in free flight the air round the aeroplane is, for all practical 
purposes, unlimited in extent. In this case too corrections can be applied which 
considerably reduce the error. 
3. Errors in Model. The smaller the scale of the model, the more difficult 
does it become to reproduce every detail of the full-scale body, and since very 
slight changes of contour may considerably affect the airflow, there will always 
be errors due to the discrepancies between the model and the full-scale body. 
63 
AIR AND AIRFLOW -- SUBSONIC SPEEDS 
Airflow free to be 
influenced by 
presence of model 
Airflow free to be 
influenced by 
presence of model 
Airflow constrained 
Airflow constrained 
Fig 2.19 Interference from wind tunnel walls 
Other experimental methods 
Provided these three limitations are fully realised, and due allowances made 
for them, wind tunnel results can provide us with some very useful experi- 
mental data (Fig. 2G). 
In addition to wind tunnel tests, experiments may be performed in the fol- 
lowing ways -- 
1. By experiments in water instead of air. 
2. By experiments in actual flight. 
Computational fluid dynamics (CFD) 
Nowadays computers provide a powerful tool for the investigation of the flow 
around an aircraft or its components. The equations that describe the 
mechanics of the airflow (the Navier-Stokes equations) were known well 
64 MECHANICS OF FLIGHT 
Fig 2G Model in wind tunnel 
(By courtesy of the Lockheed Aircraft Corporation, USA) 
Model being prepared for flutter tests in wind tunnel 
before the first flight. However, nobody could solve them, except for a few 
trivial cases. Even with the advent of computers, capable of performing mil- 
lions of calculations per second, it is not possible to solve the exact equations 
but they can be solved approximately. With this powerful tool you might think 
that there is now no need for wind tunnels. However, there are problems. Data 
from wind tunnels have to be used in CFD to model turbulence and CFD is 
not very good at accurately predicting flows where there are large turbulent 
areas, such as at stall. Predicting flows is therefore still something of a black 
art. Tunnel results are prone to scale effects, which are difficult to interpret and 
CFD also has its problems (as does flight testing -- it is hard, for example, to 
sort out effects due to the engine from those due to the airframe). Like most 
things, there is no substitute for experience and ever more sophisticated ways 
are being developed to use the power of CFD and wind tunnel testing and 
flight testing to complement each other. 
In the next chapter we look at how we use an aerofoil to produce the more 
desirable aerodynamic force, lift. Before reading this see if you can answer the 
following questions. If you can do so you have probably understood most of 
this chapter and you may proceed with confidence, but you should also try the 
numerical questions in Appendix 3. 
Can you answer these? 
1. Why is it difficult to find out the exact height of the atmosphere using a 
pressure altimeter? 
2. What is meant by the density of air? 
3. Which falls off more rapidly with height, the density or the pressure? 
4. Why does an altimeter have an adjustment so that it can be set before each 
flight? 
5. What are the chief differences between the atmosphere at sea-level and at 
30000ft, or10000m? 
6. What do you understand by the term 'streamline shape'? 
7. Distinguish between 'indicated' air speed and 'true' air speed. 
8. What is the significance of rV2? 
9. What is 'position error'? 
10. What is the difference between the 'troposphere' and the 'stratosphere'? 
12 
65 
AIR AND AIRFLOW -- SUBSONIC SPEEDS 
11. What is the meaning of (a) subsonic, and (b) supersonic speeds? 
12. What does the symbol 'q' stand for? 
For solutions see Appendix 5. 
For numerical questions on air and airflow see Appendix 3. 
66 MECHANICS OF FLIGHT 
So far we have only considered the resistance, or drag, of bodies passing 
through the air. In the design of aeroplanes it is our aim to reduce such resist- 
ance to a minimum. We now come to the equally important problem of how 
to generate a force to lift or support the weight of an aircraft. 
In the conventional aeroplane this is provided by wings, or aerofoils, which 
are inclined at a small angle to the direction of motion, the necessary forward 
motion being provided by the thrust of a rotating airscrew, or by some type of 
jet or rocket propulsion. These aerofoils are usually slightly curved, but in the 
original attempts to obtain flight on this system flat surfaces were sometimes 
used. 
Lifting surfaces 
If air flows past an aerofoil, a flat plate or indeed almost any shape that is 
inclined to the direction of flow, we find that the pressure of air on the top 
surface is reduced while that underneath is increased (Fig. 3.1, overleaf). This 
difference in pressure results in a net force on the plate trying to push it both 
upwards and backwards. In the case of a simple flat plate, you might imagine 
that the net force would act at right angles to the plate. This is not so, because 
there is also a tangential force caused by the different pressures that act on the 
small leading and trailing edge face areas. This tangential force, though small, 
is by no means negligible. Rather surprisingly, the pressure at the leading edge 
is normally very low, and at small angles of inclination, the tangential force 
will act in the direction shown in Fig. 3.2 (overleaf). The reasons for the low 
pressure at the leading edge will be shown later. Note, that although the tan- 
gential force may be directed towards the front of the plate, the resultant of 
the tangential and normal forces must always be tilted back relative to the 
local flow direction. 
Aerofoils -- 
subsonic speeds 
CHAPTER3 
Lift and drag 
The resultant or net force on the lifting surface may be conveniently split into 
two components relative to the airflow direction as follows -- 
1. The component at right angles to the direction of the airflow, called LIFT 
(Fig. 3.3). 
2. The component parallel to the direction of the airflow, called DRAG (Fig. 3.3) 
The use of the term 'lift' is apt to be misleading, for under certain conditions 
of flight, such as a vertical nose dive, it may act horizontally, and cases may 
even arise where it acts vertically downwards. 
Airflow and pressure over aerofoil 
It was soon discovered that a much greater lift, especially when compared with 
the drag, could be produced by using a curved surface instead of a flat one, 
68 MECHANICS OF FLIGHT 
Direction 
of airflow 
Resultant net force 
Low pressure 
High pressure 
Fig 3.1 Resultant force on an aerofoil due to pressure difference 
Direction 
of airflow 
Normal force 
Tangential force 
Net resultant force 
tilted back relative 
to flow direction 
Pressure acts 
on edge areas 
Fig 3.2 Forces due to pressure differences in a flat plate 
and thus the modern aerofoil was evolved. The curved surface had the 
additional advantage that it provided a certain amount of thickness, which 
was necessary for structural strength. 
Experiments have shown that air flows over an aerofoil (Fig. 3.4) much 
more smoothly than over a flat plate. 
In Fig. 3.4, which shows the flow of air over a typical aerofoil, the following 
results should be noticed -- 
1. There is a slight upflow before reaching the aerofoil. 
2. There is a downflow after passing the aerofoil. This downflow should not 
be confused with the downwash produced by the trailing vortices as 
described later. 
3. The air does not strike the aerofoil cleanly on the nose, but actually 
divides at a point just behind it on the underside. 
4. The streamlines are closer together above the aerofoil where the pressure 
is decreased. 
This last fact is at first puzzling, because, as in the venturi tube, it may lead us 
to think that the air above the aerofoil is compressed, and that therefore we 
should expect an increased pressure. The explanation is that the air over the 
69 
AEROFOILS -- SUBSONIC SPEEDS 
Net force 
Direction 
Lift 
Drag 
Fig 3.3 Lift and drags shown for the case of a descending aircraft 
Direction 
of airflow 
Increased 
speed 
of airflow 
Decreased 
speed 
of airflow 
Fig 3.4 Airflow over an aerofoil inclined at a small angle 
top surface acts as though it were passing through a kind of bottleneck, similar 
to a venturi tube, and that therefore its velocity must increase at the narrower 
portions, i.e. at the highest points of the curved aerofoil. 
The increase in kinetic energy due to the increase in velocity is accompanied 
by a corresponding decrease in static pressure. This is, in fact, an excellent 
example of Bernoulli's Theorem. 
Another way of looking at it is to consider the curvature of the streamlines. 
In order that any particular particle of air may be deflected on this curved 
path, a force must act upon it towards the centre of the curve, so it follows 
that the pressure on the outside of the particle must be greater than that on the 
inside; in other words, the pressure decreases as we move down towards the 
top surface of the aerofoil. This point of view is interesting because it empha- 
sises the importance of curving the streamlines. 
Chord line and angle of attack 
It has already been mentioned that the angle of inclination to the airflow is of 
great importance. On a curved aerofoil it is not particularly easy to define this 
angle, since we must first decide on some straight line in the aerofoil section 
from which we can ensure the angle to the direction of the airflow. 
Unfortunately, owing to the large variety of shapes used as aerofoil sections it 
is not easy to define this chord line to suit all aerofoils. Nearly all modern aero- 
foils have a convex under-surface; and the chord must be specially defined, 
although it is usually taken as the line joining the leading edge to the trailing 
edge. This is the centre in the particular case of symmetrical aerofoils. 
We call the angle between the chord of the aerofoil and the direction of the 
airflow the angle of attack (Fig. 3.5). 
This angle is often known as the angle of incidence; that term was avoided 
in early editions of this book because it was apt to be confused with the 
riggers' angle of incidence, i.e. the angle between the chord of the aerofoil and 
some fixed datum line in the aeroplane. Now that aircraft are no longer 
'rigged' (in the old sense) there is no objection to the term angle of incidence; 
but by the same token there is no objection either to angle of attack -- many 
pilots and others have become accustomed to it; it is almost universally used 
in America, and so we shall continue to use it in this edition. 
[Note. If we wish to be precise we must be careful in the definition of the 
term 'angle of attack', because, as has already been noticed, the direction of 
the airflow is changed by the presence of the aerofoil itself, so that the direc- 
tion of the airflow which actually passes over the surface of the aerofoil is not 
the same as that of the airflow at a considerable distance from the aerofoil. We 
shall consider the direction of the airflow to be that of the air stream at such 
a distance that it is undisturbed by the presence of the aerofoil.] 
70 MECHANICS OF FLIGHT 
Line of zero lift 
Now an aerofoil may provide lift even when it is inclined at a slightly negative 
angle to the airflow. And one may well ask, how can an aerofoil inclined at a 
negative angle produce lift? The idea seems absurd, but the explanation of the 
riddle is simply that the aerofoil is not really inclined at a negative angle. Our 
curious chord may be at a negative angle, but the curved surfaces of the aero- 
foil are inclined at various angles, positive and negative, the net effect being 
that of a slightly positive angle, which produces lift. 
If we tilt the nose of the aerofoil downwards until it produces no lift, it will 
be in an exactly similar position to that of a flat plate placed edgewise to the 
airflow and producing no lift, and if we now draw a straight line through the 
aerofoil parallel to the airflow (Fig. 3.6, overleaf) it will be the inclination of 
this line which settles whether the aerofoil provides lift or not. 
Such a line is called the line of zero lift or neutral lift line, and would in 
some senses be a better definition of the chord line, but it can only be found 
by wind tunnel experiments for each aerofoil, and, even when it has been 
found, it is awkward from the point of view of practical measurements. 
Nor is it of much significance in practical flight, except perhaps in a dive 
when the angle of attack may approach the no lift condition. 
Note that for an aerofoil of symmetrical shape zero lift corresponds to zero 
angle of attack. 
71 
AEROFOILS -- SUBSONIC SPEEDS 
Chord line 
Direction 
of airflow 
Angle of attack 
(a) 
Chord line 
Direction 
of airflow 
(b) 
Angle of attack 
Chord line 
Direction 
of airflow 
(c) 
Angle of attack 
Fig. 3.5 Chord line and angle of attack 
(a) Aerofoil with concave undersurface. 
(b) Aerofoil with flat undersurface. 
(c) Aerofoil with convex undersurface. 
Pressure plotting 
As the angle of attack is altered the lift and drag change very rapidly, and 
experiments show that this is due to changes in the distribution of pressure 
over the aerofoil. These experiments are carried out by the method known as 
'pressure plotting' (Fig. 3.7), in which a number of small holes in the aerofoil 
surface (a, b, c, d, etc.) are connected to a number of glass manometer tubes 
(a, b, c, d, etc.) containing water or other liquid and connected to a common 
reservoir. Where there is a suction on the aerofoil the liquid in the correspon- 
ding tubes is sucked up; where there is an increased pressure the liquid is 
depressed. This is really several U-tube manometers connected to a common 
reservoir (p. 60). Such experiments have been made both on models in wind 
tunnels and on aeroplanes in flight, and the results are most interesting and 
instructive. 
The reader is advised to work through Example No. 94 in Appendix 3. In 
this example the results of an actual experiment are given, together with a full 
explanation of how to interpret the results. In order to follow through to the 
end of this example it is necessary to have a knowledge of the lift formula 
given later in this chapter, but the actual 'pressure plotting' can be done 
without this. Multiple manometers provide a good visual indication of the 
form of a pressure distribution and are frequently used for teaching. If results 
are to be recorded, it is more convenient to use pressure transducers coupled 
to a computer (p. 61). 
Pressure distribution 
Figure 3.8 shows the pressure distribution, obtained in this manner, over an aero- 
foil at an angle of attack of 4°. Two points are particularly noticeable, namely -- 
1. The decrease in pressure on the upper surface is greater than the increase 
on the lower surface. 
72 MECHANICS OF FLIGHT 
Direction 
of 
airflow 
Line of 
zero lift 
Fig 3.6 Line of zero lift 
2. The pressure is not evenly distributed, both the decreased pressure on the 
upper surface and the increased pressure on the lower surface being most 
marked over the front portion of the aerofoil. 
Both these discoveries are of extreme importance. 
The first shows that, although both surfaces contribute, it is the upper 
surface, by means of its decreased pressure, which provides the greater part of 
the lift; at some angles as much as four-fifths. 
The student is at first startled by this fact, as this seems contrary to common 
sense; but, as so often happens, having learnt the truth, he is inclined to exag- 
gerate it, and to refer to the area above the aerofoil as a 'partial vacuum' or 
even a 'vacuum'. Although, by a slight stretch of imagination, we might allow 
the term 'partial vacuum', the term 'vacuum' is hopelessly misleading. We find 
that the greatest height to which water in a manometer is sucked up when air 
73 
AEROFOILS -- SUBSONIC SPEEDS 
Static 
pressure 
Static 
pressure 
Adjustable 
reservoir 
Reservoir 
Part plan view of aerofoil 
abcde f ghk lm nop 
abcdefg 
h klmnop 
abcde f g 
Fig 3.7 Pressure plotting 
Increased pressures 
Resultant 
force 
Decreased pressures 
Fig 3.8 Pressure distribution over an aerofoil 
flows over an ordinary aerofoil at the ordinary speeds of flight is about 120 to 
150 mm; now, if there were a 'vacuum' over the top surface, the water would 
be sucked up about 10 m, i.e. 10 000 mm. Or, looking at it another way, 
suppose that there were a 'vacuum' over the top surface of an aerofoil and that 
the pressure underneath was increased from 100 kN/m2 to 120 kN/m2, then we 
would have an average upward pressure on the aerofoil of 120 kN/m2. The 
actual average lift obtained from an aeroplane wing is from about 1/2 up to 5 
kN/m2. Take a piece of cardboard of about 100 cm2, or 1/10th of a square 
metre, and place a weight of 100 N on it; lift this up and it will give you some 
idea of the average lift provided by one-tenth of a square metre of aeroplane 
wing, and the type of load that has to be carried by the skin. You will not want 
to repeat the experiment with more than 10 000 N on the cardboard! 
The reason why the pressure distribution diagram of Fig. 3.8 has not been 
completed round the leading edge is because the changes of pressure are very 
sudden in this region and cannot conveniently be represented on a diagram. 
The increased pressure on the underside continues until we reach a point head- 
on into the wind where the air is brought to rest and the increase of pressure 
is 1/2 rV2, or q, as recorded on a pitot tube. The point at which this happens 
is called the stagnation point, and its position round the leading edge varies 
slightly as the angle of attack of the aerofoil is changed but is always just 
behind the nose on the underside of positive angles of attack. After the stag- 
nation point there is a very sudden drop to zero, followed by an equally 
sudden change to the decreased pressure of the upper surface, and rather sur- 
prisingly on the nose. 
Centre of pressure 
The second thing that we learn from the pressure distribution diagram -- 
namely, that both decreases and increases of pressure are greatest near the 
leading edge of the aerofoil -- means that if all the distributed forces due to 
pressure were replaced by a single resultant force, this single force would act 
less than halfway back along the chord. The position on the chord at which 
this resultant force acts is called the centre of pressure (Fig. 3.9). The idea of 
a centre of pressure is very similar to that of a centre of gravity of a body 
whose weight is unevenly distributed, and it should therefore present no diffi- 
culty to the student who understands ordinary mechanics. 
To sum up, we may say that we have a decreased pressure above the aero- 
foil and an increased pressure below, that the decrease of pressure above is 
greater than the increase below, and that in both cases the effect is greatest 
near the leading edge (Fig. 3.8). 
All this is important when we consider the structure of the wing; for 
instance, we shall realise that the top surface or 'skin' must be held down on 
to the ribs, while the bottom skin will simply be pressed up against them. 
74 MECHANICS OF FLIGHT 
Total resultant force on an aerofoil 
If we add up the distributed forces due to pressure over an aerofoil, and 
replace it by the total resultant force acting at the centre of pressure, we find 
that this force is not at right angles to the chord line nor at right angles to the 
flight direction. Near the tips of swept wings it can sometimes be inclined 
forward relative to the latter line due to rather complicated three dimensional 
effects, but over most of the wing, and on average, it must always be inclined 
backwards, otherwise we would have a forwards component, or negative 
drag, and hence perpetual motion. 
Although the force must on average be inclined backwards relative to the 
flight direction as in Fig. 3.10 it can often be inclined forwards relative to the 
chord line normal. Figure 3.10 illustrates the situation. You will see from this 
figure that there can be a component of the force that is trying to bend the 
75 
AEROFOILS -- SUBSONIC SPEEDS 
Resultant
force
Centre 
of pressure 
Fig 3.9 Centre of pressure 
Direction 
of airflow 
Chord line 
Pe 
rpendicula 
r to chord line 
Perpendicular to airflow
Resultant force
A 
B 
C 
O 
Fig 3.10 Inclination of resultant force 
wings forward. This may come as a surprise, because you might have expected 
that the wings would always be bent rearwards. 
Movement of centre of pressure 
Pressure plotting experiments also show that as the angle of attack is altered 
the distribution of pressure over the aerofoil changes considerably, and in con- 
sequence there will be a movement of the centre of pressure. The position of 
the centre of pressure is usually defined as being a certain proportion of the 
chord from the leading edge. Figure 3.11 illustrates typical pressure distri- 
bution over an aerofoil at varying angles of attack. In these diagrams only the 
lift component of the total pressure has been plotted -- the drag component has 
hardly any effect on the position of the centre of pressure. It will be noticed 
that at a negative angle, and even at 0°, the pressure on the upper surface near 
the leading edge is increased above normal, and that on the lower surface is 
decreased; this causes the loop in the pressure diagram, which means that this 
portion of the aerofoil is being pushed downwards, while the rear portion is 
being pushed upwards, so that the whole aerofoil tends to turn over nose first. 
So, even at the angle of zero lift, when the upward and downward forces 
are equal, there is a nose-down pitching movement on the aerofoil; as will be 
seen later this is a matter of considerable significance. Putting it another way, 
76 MECHANICS OF FLIGHT 
--4° 
0° 
4° 
8° 
12° 
16° 
20° 
Fig 3.11 How the lift distribution changes with angle of attack 
at these negative angles the centre of pressure is a long way back -- the only 
place where we could put one force which would have the same moment or 
turning effect as the distributed pressure would be a long way behind the 
trailing edge, in fact at zero lift it could not provide a pitching moment at all 
unless it were an infinite distance back -- which is absurd. Perhaps a more sen- 
sible way of putting it is to say that there is a couple acting on the aerofoil, 
and a couple has no resultant and has the same moment about any point (see 
Chapter 1). 
As the angle of attack is increased up to 16°, the centre of pressure gradu- 
ally moves forward until it is less than one-third of the chord from the leading 
edge; above this angle it begins to move backwards again. 
Now during flight, for reasons we shall see later, the angle of attack is 
usually between 2° and 8° and is very rarely below 0° or above 16°. So, for the 
ordinary angles of flight, as the angle of attack of the aerofoil is increased, the 
centre of pressure tends to move forward. 
Lift a pencil at its centre of gravity and it will lie horizontal; move the pos- 
ition at which you lift it forwards towards the point and the rear end of the 
pencil will drop: this is because the centre of lift has moved forwards as com- 
pared with the centre of gravity. Therefore if the aerofoil is in balance or 
'trimmed' at one angle of attack, so that the resultant force passes through the 
centre of gravity, then the forward movement of the centre of pressure on the 
aerofoil as the angle of attack is increased will tend to drop still more the trailing 
edge of the aerofoil; in other words, the angle of attack will increase even more, 
and this will in turn cause the centre of pressure to move farther forward, and 
so on. This is called instability, and it is one of the problems of flight. 
If we were to take the wing off a model aeroplane and try to make it glide 
without any fuselage or tail, we would find that it would either turn over nose 
first or its nose would go up in the air and it would turn over on to its back. 
This is because the wing is unstable, and although we might be able to weight 
it so that it would start on its glide correctly, it would very soon meet some 
disturbance in the air which would cause it to turn over one way or the other. 
Curiously enough, in the case of a flat plate, an increase of the angle of 
attack over the same angles causes the centre of pressure to move backwards; 
this tends to dip the nose of the plate back again to its original position, and 
so makes the flat plate stable. For this reason it is possible to take a flat piece 
of stiff paper or cardboard, and, after properly weighting it, to make it glide 
across the room. If it meets a disturbance the centre of pressure moves in such 
a way as to correct it. Note that the flat piece of paper will only glide if it is 
weighted so that the centre of gravity is roughly one-third of the chord back 
from the leading edge. If it is not weighted the centre of pressure will always 
be in front of the centre of gravity, and this will cause the piece of paper to 
revolve rapidly. 
The unstable movement of the centre of pressure is a disadvantage of the 
ordinary curved aerofoil, and in a later chapter we shall consider the steps 
which are taken to counteract it. Attempts have been made to devise aerofoil 
77 
AEROFOILS -- SUBSONIC SPEEDS 
shapes which have not got this unpleasant characteristic, and it has been found 
possible to design an aerofoil in which the centre of pressure remains practi- 
cally stationary over the angles of attack used in ordinary flight. The chief 
feature in such aerofoils is that the under-surface is convex, and that there is 
sometimes a reflex curvature towards the trailing edge (see Fig. 3.12); nearly 
all modern aerofoil sections have in fact got convex camber on the lower 
surface. Unfortunately, attempts to improve the stability of the aerofoil may 
often tend to spoil other important characteristics. 
Lift, drag and pitching moment of an aerofoil 
Now the ultimate object of the aerofoil is to obtain the lift necessary to keep the 
aeroplane in the air; in order to obtain this lift it must be propelled through the 
air at a definite velocity and it must be set at a definite angle of attack to the flow 
of air past it. We have already discovered that we cannot obtain a purely vertical 
force on the aerofoil; in other words, we can only obtain lift at the expense of a 
certain amount of drag. The latter is a necessary evil, and it must be reduced to 
the minimum so as to reduce the power required to pull the aerofoil through the 
air, or alternatively to increase the velocity which we can obtain from a given 
engine power. Our next task, therefore, is to investigate how much lift and how 
much drag we shall obtain from different shaped aerofoils at various angles of 
attack and at various velocities. The task is one of appalling magnitude; there is 
no limit to the number of aerofoil shapes which we might test, and in spite of 
thousands of experiments carried out in wind tunnels and by full-scale tests in 
the air, it is still impossible to say that we have discovered the best-shaped aero- 
foil for any particular purpose. However, modern theoretical methods make it 
possible to predict the behaviour of aerofoil sections. Such methods can even be 
used to design aerofoils to give specified characteristics. 
In wind-tunnel work it is the usual practice to measure lift and drag separ- 
ately, rather than to measure the total resultant force and then split it up into 
two components. The aerofoil is set at various angles of attack to the airflow, 
and the lift, drag and pitching moment are measured on a balance. 
The results of the experiments show that within certain limitations the lift, 
drag and pitching moment of an aerofoil depend on -- 
(a) The shape of the aerofoil. 
(b) The plan area of the aerofoil. 
78 MECHANICS OF FLIGHT 
Fig 3.12 Reflex curve near trailing edge 
(c) The square of the velocity. 
(d) The density of the air. 
Notice the similarity of these conclusions to those obtained when measuring 
drag, and in all cases there are similar limitations to the conclusions arrived at. 
The reader should notice that whereas when measuring drag we considered 
the frontal area of the body concerned, on aerofoils we take the plan area. This 
is more convenient because the main force with which we are concerned, i.e. 
the lift, is at right angles to the direction of motion and very nearly at right 
angles to the aerofoils themselves, and therefore this force will depend on the 
plan area rather than the front elevation. The actual plan area will alter as the 
angle of attack is changed and therefore it is more convenient to refer results 
to the maximum plan area (the area projected on the plane of the chord), so 
that the area will remain constant whatever the angle of attack may be. Now 
we use the symbol S, for the plan area of a wing, to replace the frontal areas, 
which we used when considering drag alone in the previous chapter. 
In so far as the above conclusions are true, we can express them as formulae 
in the forms -- 
Lift CL. rV2.SorCL.q.S 
Drag CD. rV2.SorCD.q.S 
Pitchingmoment CM. rV2.ScorCM.q.Sc 
Since the pitching moment is a moment, i.e. a force distance, and since 
rV2. S represents a force, it is necessary to introduce a length into the equa- 
tion -- this is in the form of the chord, c, measured in metres. 
The pitching moment is positive when it tends to push the nose upwards, 
negative when the nose tends to go downwards. 
The symbols CL, CD and CM are called the lift coefficient, drag coefficient 
and pitching moment coefficient of the aerofoil respectively; they depend on 
the shape of the aerofoil, and they alter with changes in the angle of attack. 
The air density is represented by r in kilograms per cubic metre, S is the plan 
area of the wing in square metres, V is the air speed, in metres per second, c 
the chord of the aerofoil in metres; the method of writing the formulae in 
terms of rV2, or q, has already been explained in Chapter 2. 
12 
12 
12 
12 
12 
79 
AEROFOILS -- SUBSONIC SPEEDS 
Aerofoil characteristics 
The easiest way of setting out the results of experiments on aerofoil sections is 
to draw curves showing how -- 
(a) the lift coefficient, 
(b) the drag coefficient, 
(c) the ratio of lift to drag, and 
(d) the position of the centre of pressure, or the pitching moment coefficient, 
alter as the angle of attack is increased over the ordinary angles of flight. 
Typical graphs are shown in Figs 3.13, 3.15, 3.16 and 3.17. These do not 
refer to any particular aerofoil; they are intended merely to show the type of 
curves obtained for an ordinary general purpose aerofoil. 
In Appendix 1 at the end of the book, tables are given showing the values 
of CL, CD, L/D, position of the centre of pressure, and CM, for a few well- 
known aerofoil sections. The reader is advised to plot the graphs for these 
sections, and to compare them with one another (see example Nos. 98 to 101 
in Appendix 3). In this way the reader will understand much more clearly the 
arguments followed in the remaining portion of this chapter. 
It is much more satisfactory to plot the coefficients of lift, drag and pitching 
moment rather than the total lift, drag and pitching moment, because the coef- 
ficients are practically independent of the air density, the scale of the aerofoil 
and the velocity used in the experiment, whereas the total lift, drag and 
moment depend on the actual conditions at the time of the experiment. In 
other words, suppose we take a particular aerofoil section and test it on dif- 
ferent scales at different velocities in various wind tunnels throughout the 
world, and also full-scale in actual flight, we should in each case obtain the 
same curves showing how the coefficients change with angle of attack. 
It must be admitted that, in practice, the curves obtained from these various 
experiments do not exactly coincide; this is because the theories which have 
led us to adopt the formula lift CL . rV2 . S are not exactly true for very 
much the same reasons as those we mentioned when dealing with drag -- for 
instance, scale effect and the interference of wind-tunnel walls. As a result of 
the large number of experiments which have been performed, it is possible to 
make allowances for these errors and so obtain good accuracy whatever the 
conditions of the experiment. 
Now let us look at the curves to see what they mean, for a graph which is 
properly understood can convey a great deal of information in a compact and 
practical form. 
12 
80 MECHANICS OF FLIGHT 
Lift curve 
Let us first see how the lift coefficient changes with the angle of attack (Fig. 
3.13). 
We notice that when the angle of attack has reached 0° there is already a 
definite lift coefficient and therefore a definite lift; this is a property of most 
cambered aerofoils. A flat plate, or a symmetrical aerofoil, will of course give 
no lift when there is no angle of attack. 
Then between 0° and about 12° the graph is practically a straight line, 
meaning that as the angle of attack increases there is a steady increase in the 
lift; whereas above 12°, although the lift still increases for a few degrees, the 
increase is now comparatively small and the graph is curving to form a top, or 
maximum point. 
At about 15° the lift coefficient reaches a maximum, and above this angle 
it begins to decrease, the graph now curving downwards. 
81 
AEROFOILS -- SUBSONIC SPEEDS 
Stalling angle
--4° 
0° 
4° 
8° 
12° 
16° 
20° 
0° 
15° 
1.4 
1.2 
1.0 
0.8 
0.6 
0.4 
0.2 
0 
Lift coefficient
Ordinary angles of flight 
Angle of attack 
Fig 3.13 Lift curve 
Stalling of aerofoil 
This last discovery is perhaps the most important factor in the understanding 
of the why and wherefore of flight. It means that whereas at small angles any 
increase in the angle at which the aerofoil strikes the air will result in an 
increase in lift, when a certain angle is reached any further increase of angle 
will result in a loss of lift. 
This angle is called the stalling angle of the aerofoil, and, rather curiously, 
perhaps, we find that the shape of the aerofoil makes little difference to the 
angle at which this stalling takes place, although it may affect considerably the 
amount of lift obtained from the aerofoil at that angle. 
Now, what is the cause of this comparatively sudden breakdown of lift? 
The student will be well advised to take the first available opportunity of 
watching, or trying for himself, some simple experiment to see what happens. 
Although, naturally, the best demonstration can be given in wind tunnels with 
proper apparatus for the purpose, perfectly satisfactory experiments can be 
made by using paper or wooden model aerofoils and inserting them in any 
fairly steady flow of air or water, or moving them through air or water. The 
movement of the fluid is emphasised by introducing wool streamers or smoke 
in the case of air and coloured streams in the case of water. 
Contrary to what might be expected, the relative speed at which the aero- 
foil moves through the fluid makes very little difference to the angle at which 
stalling takes place; in fact, an aerofoil stalls at a certain angle, not at a certain 
speed. (It is not correct to talk about the stalling speed of an aerofoil, but it 
will be seen in a later chapter why we talk about the stalling speed of an aero- 
plane.) Now what happens? While the angle at which the aerofoil strikes the 
fluid is comparatively small, the fluid is deflected by the aerofoil, and the flow 
is of a steady nature (compare Fig. 3.4); but suddenly, when the critical angle 
of about 15° is reached, there is a complete change in the nature of the flow. 
The airflow breaks away or separates from the top surface forming vortices 
similar to those behind a flat plate placed at right angles to the wind; there is 
therefore very little lift. Some experiments actually show that the fluid which 
has flowed beneath the under-surface doubles back round the trailing edge and 
proceeds to flow forward over the upper surface. In short, the steady flow has 
broken down and what is called separation or 'stalling' has taken its place, 
with consequent loss in lift (Fig. 3.14). 
Anyone who has steered a boat will be familiar with the same kind of 
phenomenon when the rudder is put too far over, and yachtsmen also experi- 
ence 'stalling' when their sails are set at too large an angle to the relative wind. 
There are, in fact, many examples of stalling in addition to that of the aero- 
foil.What happens is made even more clear if we look again at the results of 
pressure plotting (Fig. 3.11). We notice that up to the critical angle consider- 
able suction has been built up over the top surface, especially near the leading 
82 MECHANICS OF FLIGHT 
edge, whereas when we reach the stalling angle the suction near the leading 
edge disappears, and this accounts for the loss in lift, because the pressure on 
other parts of the aerofoil remains much the same as before the critical angle. 
Some students are apt to think that all the lift disappears after the critical 
angle; this is not so, as will easily be seen by reference to either the lift curve 
or to the pressure plotting diagrams. The aerofoil will, in fact, give some lift 
up to an angle of attack of 90°. Modern interceptor aircraft are sometimes 
flown at very high angles of attack during violent manoeuvres, so the upper 
portion of the graph is nowadays quite important. 
The stalling angle, then, is that angle of attack at which the lift coefficient 
of an aerofoil is a maximum, and beyond which it begins to decrease owing to 
the airflow becoming separated. 
The drag curve 
Now for the drag coefficient curve (Fig. 3.15, overleaf). Here we find much 
what we might expect. The drag is least at about 0°, or even a small negative 
angle, and increases on both sides of this angle; up to about 6°, however, the 
increase in drag is not very rapid, then it gradually becomes more and more 
rapid, especially after the stalling angle when the airflow separates. 
The lift/drag ratio curve 
Next we come to a very interesting curve (Fig. 3.16, overleaf), which shows 
the relation between the lift and the drag at various angles of attack. 
In a former paragraph we came to the conclusion that we want as much lift, 
but as little drag, as it is possible to obtain from the aerofoil. Now from the 
lift curve we find that we shall get most lift at about 15°, from the drag curve 
least drag at about 0°, but both of these are at the extreme range of possible 
83 
AEROFOILS -- SUBSONIC SPEEDS 
Direction 
of airflow 
Fig 3.14 Stalling of an aerofoil 
angles, and at neither of them do we really get the best conditions for flight, 
i.e. the best lift in comparison to drag, the best lift/drag ratio. 
If the reader has available the lift curve and the drag curve for any aerofoil, 
he can easily plot the lift/drag curve for himself by reading CL off the lift curve 
at each angle and dividing it by the CD at the same angle. It should be noted 
that it makes no difference whether we plot L/D or CL/CD, as both will give 
thesamenumericalvalue,sinceL CL. rV2.SandD CD. rV2.S. 
We find that the lift/drag ratio increases very rapidly up to about 3° or 4°, 
at which angles the lift is nearly 24 times the drag (some aerofoils give an even 
greater maximum ratio of lift to drag); the ratio then gradually falls off 
because, although the lift is still increasing, the drag is increasing even more 
rapidly, until at the stalling angle the lift may be only 10 or 12 times as great 
as the drag, and after the stalling angle the ratio falls still further until it 
reaches 0 at 90°. 
The chief point of interest about the lift/drag curve is the fact that this ratio is 
greatest at an angle of attack of about 3° or 4°; in other words, it is at this angle that 
the aerofoil gives its best all-round results -- i.e. it is most able to do what we chiefly 
require of it, namely to give as much lift as possible consistent with a small drag. 
12 
12 
84 MECHANICS OF FLIGHT 
--4° 
0° 
4° 
8° 
12° 
16° 
20° 
0° 
15° 
Angle of attack 
Drag coefficient
0.28 
0.24 
0.20 
0.16 
0.12 
0.08 
0.04 
0 
Ordinary angles of flight 
Stalling angle
Fig 3.15 Drag curve 
The centre of pressure and moment coefficient 
Lastly, let us examine the curves (Fig. 3.17, overleaf) which show how the 
centre of pressure moves, and what happens to the pitching moment coeffi- 
cient, as the angle of attack is increased. 
The centre of pressure curve merely confirms what we have already learnt 
about the movement of the centre of pressure on an ordinary aerofoil. After 
having been a long way back at negative angles, at 0° it is about 0.70 of the 
chord from the leading edge, at 4° it is 0.40 of the chord back, and at 12° 0.30 
of the chord; in other words, the centre of pressure gradually moves forward 
as the angle is increased over the ordinary angles of flight; and this tends 
towards instability. After 12° it begins to move back again, but this is not of 
great importance since these angles are not often used in flight. 
It is easy to understand the effect of the movement of the centre of pressure, 
and for that reason it has perhaps been given more emphasis in this book than 
it would be in more advanced books on the subject. 
It is important to remember that the pitching moment, and its coefficient, 
depend not only on the lift (or more correctly on the resultant force) and on 
85 
AEROFOILS -- SUBSONIC SPEEDS 
--4° 
0° 
4° 
8° 
12° 
16° 
20° 
0° 
15° 
Angle of attack 
Lift/drag ratio
28 
24 
20 
16 
12 
8 
4 
0 
3° 
Most efficient angle
Ordinary angles of flight 
Stalling angle
Fig 3.16 Lift/drag curve 
the position of the centre of pressure, but also on the point about which we 
are considering the moment -- which we shall call the reference point. There is, 
of course, no moment about the centre of pressure itself -- that, after all, is the 
meaning of centre of pressure -- but, as we have seen, the centre of pressure is 
not a fixed point. If we take as our point of reference some fixed point on the 
chord we shall find that the pitching moment -- which was already slightly 
nose-down (i.e. slightly negative) at the angle of zero lift -- increases or 
decreases as near as matters in proportion to the angle of attack, i.e. the graph 
is a straight line, like that of the lift coefficient, over the ordinary angles of 
flight. About the leading edge, for instance, it becomes more and more nose- 
down as the angle is increased; but about a point near the trailing edge, 
although starting at the same slightly nose-down moment at zero lift, it 
becomes less nose-down, and finally nose-up, with increase of angle (Fig. 
3.18). 
The reader may be surprised at the increasing nose-down moment about the 
leading edge, because is not the centre of pressure moving forward? Yes, but 
the movement is small and the increasing lift has more effect on the pitching 
moment. The intelligent reader may be even more surprised to hear that an 
increasing nose-down tendency is a requirement for the pitching stability of 
the aircraft, for have we not said that the movement of the centre of pressure 
was an unstable one? Yes, this is a surprising subject, but the answer to the 
apparent paradox emphasises once again the importance of the point of refer- 
ence; in considering the stability of the whole aircraft our point of reference 
must be the centre of gravity, and the centre of gravity is always, or nearly 
86 MECHANICS OF FLIGHT 
--4° 
0° 
4° 
8° 
12° 
16° 
20° 
0° 
Angle of attack 
Stalling angle
Ordinary angles of flight 
Centre of pressure 
1.0 
0.8 
0.6 
0.4 
0.2 
0 
Fraction of chord from leading edge
Moment coefficient about 
aerodynamic centre 
Leading 
edge 
Trailing 
edge 
+ 0.1 
0 
-- 0.1 
-- 0.2 
CM 
Quarter-chord position 
Position of aerodynamic centre 
Fig 3.17 Centre of pressure and moment coefficient curves 
always, behind the leading edge of the wing, so the change of pitching moment 
with angle of attack is more like that about the trailing edge -- which is defi- 
nitely unstable. 
Aerodynamic centre 
But something else of considerable importance arises from the differing effects 
of different reference points. For if about the leading edge there is a steady 
increase, and about a point near the trailing edge a steady decrease in the nose- 
down pitching moment, there must be some point on the chord about which 
there is no change in the pitching moment as the angle of attack is increased, 
about which the moment remains at the small negative nose-down value that 
it had at the zero lift angle (Figs 3.17 and 3.18). 
This point is called the aerodynamic centre of the wing. 
So we have two possible ways of thinking about the effects of increase of 
angle of attack on the pitching moment of an aerofoil, or later of the whole 
aeroplane; one is to think of the lift changing, and its point of application 
(centre of pressure) changing; the other is to think of the point of application 
(aerodynamic centre) being fixed, and only the lift changing (Fig. 3.19, 
overleaf). Both are sound theoretically; the conception of a moving centre of 
pressure may sound easier at first, but for the aircraft as a whole it is simpler 
to consider the lift as always acting at the aerodynamic centre. In both 
methods we really ought to consider the total force rather than just the lift, but 
87 
AEROFOILS -- SUBSONIC SPEEDS 
Moment coefficient about point 
near trailing edge 
Angle of zero lift
Moment coefficient about 
aerodynamic centre 
Moment coefficient, CM
Angle of attack, a 
--4° 
0° 
4° 
8° 
12° 
16° 
+ 0.2 
+0.1 
0 
-- 0.1 
-- 0.2 
-- 0.3 
Moment coefficient about 
leading edge 
Fig 3.18 Moment coefficient about different reference points 
the drag is small in comparison and, for most purposes, it is sufficiently accu- 
rate to consider the lift alone. 
At subsonic speeds the aerodynamic centre is usually about one-quarter of 
the chord from the leading edge, and theoretical considerations confirm this. 
In practice, however, it differs slightly according to the aerofoil section, usually 
being ahead of the quarter-chord point in older type sections, and slightly aft 
in more modern low drag types. 
The graph in Fig. 3.18 (it can hardly be called a curve) shows how nearly 
the moment coefficient, about the aerodynamic centre, remains constant on 
our aerofoil at its small zero-lift negative value of about  0.09. This is further 
confirmed by the figures of CM given in Appendix 1 for a variety of aerofoil 
shapes. 
The graphs tell us all we want to know about a particular wing section; they 
give us the 'characteristics' of the section, and from them we can work out the 
effectiveness of a wing on which this section is used. 
For example, to find the lift, drag and pitching moment per unit span 
(about the aerodynamic centre) of an aerofoil of this section, of chord 2 metres 
at 6° angle of attack, and flying at 100 knots at standard sea-level conditions. 
From Figs 3.13, 3.15 and 3.17, we find that at 6° -- 
CL  0.6 
CD 0.028 
CM   0.09 about aerodynamic centre 
100 knots 51.6 m/s 
Since rV2 (or q) is common to the lift, drag and moment formulae, we can 
first work out its value -- 
12 
88 MECHANICS OF FLIGHT 
Zero lift 
angle 
Zero lift 
angle 
A.C. 
same position 
at all angles 
0° 
10° 
C.P. 10° 
L0° C.P. 0° 
L10° 
0° 
10° 
L0° 
L10° 
M0 
M0 
M0 
Fig. 3.19 Centre of pressure and aerodynamic centre 
Two ways of looking at it. 
q pV2  
1.225 51.6 51.6 1631 N/m2 
Solift CL.q.S 0.6 1631 2 1957N 
drag CD.q.S 0.028 1631 2 91.3N 
pitchingmoment CM.q.Sc  0.09 1631 20 2 
  5872 N--m 
But where is the aerodynamic centre on this aerofoil? 
At zero lift there is only a pure moment, or couple, acting on the aerofoil, 
and since the moment of a couple is the same about any point, this moment, 
and its coefficient, must be equal to that about the aerodynamic centre, which 
we shall call CM.AC(sometimes written as CMO), and this by definition will 
remain the same whatever the angle of attack. 
For all practical purposes we can assume that the aerodynamic centre is on 
the chord line, though it may be very slightly above or below. So let us suppose 
that it is on the chord line, and at distance x from the leading edge, and that 
the angle of attack is a° (Fig. 3.20). 
The moment about the aerodynamic centre, i.e. CM . AC . q . Sc, will be equal 
to the moment about the leading edge (which we will call CM . LE . q . Sc) plus 
the moments of L and D about the aerodynamic centre; the leverage being x 
cos a and x sin a respectively. 
So 
CM.AC.q.Sc CM.LE.q.Sc CL.q.S.x.cosa CD.q.S.x.sina 
and, dividing all through by q . S, 
CM.AC.c CM.LE.c CL.x.cosa CD.x.sina 
 x c.(CM.AC CM.LE)/(CLcosa CDsina) 
12 
12 
89 
AEROFOILS -- SUBSONIC SPEEDS 
M0 
L 
D 
x 
xcosa 
xsina 
M(LE ) 
a° 
Aerodynamic centre 
Relative wind 
Chord line 
Fig 3.20 To find aerodynamic centre 
or, expressed as a fraction of the chord, 
x/c (CM.AC CM.LE)/(CLcosa CDsina) 
But the moment coefficient about the leading edge for this aerofoil at 6° is 
 0.22 (see Fig. 3.18), and CM . AC is  0.09 (Fig. 3.17), 
CL 0.6,cos6°  0.994,CD 0.028,sin6°  0.10 
So 
x/c ( 0.09 0.22)/(0.6 0.994 0.028 1.10) 
0.13/(0.60 0.003) 
0.216 
which means that the aerodynamic centre is 0.216 of the chord, or 0.432 
metres, behind the leading edge, and so in this instance is forward of the 
quarter-chord (0.25) point. 
Notice that at small angles, such as 6°, cos a is approx 1, sin a is nearly 0, 
so we can approximate by forgetting about the drag and saying that 
x/c (CM.AC CM.LE)/CL 
About the centre of pressure there is no moment, so 
(Distance of C.P. from L.E.)/c   CM . LE/(CL cos a CD sin a) 
  CM.LE/CL approx 
  0.22/0.60 0.37 
thus confirming the position of the C.P. as shown in Fig. 3.17. 
All this has been explained rather fully at this stage; its real significance in 
regard to the stability of the aircraft will be revealed later. 
The ideal aerofoil 
But what characteristics do we want in the ideal aerofoil section? We cannot 
answer that question fully until a later stage, but briefly we need -- 
1. A High Maximum Lift Coefficient. In other words, the top part of the lift 
90 MECHANICS OF FLIGHT 
curve should be as high as possible. In our imaginary aerofoil it is only 
about 1.18, but we would like a maximum of 1.6 or even more. Why? 
Because we shall find that the higher the maximum CL, the lower will be 
the landing speed of the aeroplane, and nothing will contribute more 
towards the safety of an aircraft than that it shall land at a low speed. 
2. A Good Lift/Drag Ratio. If we look again at Fig. 3.16, we can see that at 
a particular angle of attack, the lift/drag ratio of the aerofoil has a 
maximum value. This ratio does not occur at the angle of attack for 
minimum drag (Fig. 3.15) or at that for maximum lift coefficient (Fig. 
3.13), but somewhere in between. Why is this ratio important? Because to 
get the smallest possible resistance to motion for a given weight we must 
operate at this angle of attack, and the higher the maximum lift/drag ratio, 
the smaller the air resistance that will be experienced. 
The real importance of both high lift/drag ratio and high CL3/2/CD, dis- 
cussed below, will become clearer when we talk about aircraft 
performance (Chapter 7). Let us just note here that both are important 
from the point of view of aerofoil design. 
3. A High Maximum Value of CL3/2/CD. The power required to propel an 
aeroplane is proportional to drag velocity, i.e. to DV. For an aero- 
plane of given weight, the lift for level flight must be constant (being 
equal to the weight). If L is constant, D must vary inversely as L/D (or 
CL/CD). From the formula L CL . rV2S it can be seen that if L, r and 
S are constant (a reasonable assumption), then V is inversely pro- 
portional to  CL (or CL1/2). Thus power required is proportional to DV, 
which is inversely proportional to (CL/CD) CL1/2, i.e. to CL3/2/CD.In 
other words, the greater the value of CL3/2/CD, the less the power 
required, and this is especially important from the point of view of 
climbing and staying in the air as long as possible on a given quantity of 
fuel and as we have seen, getting the best economy from a piston-engined 
aircraft. If the reader likes to work out the value of this fraction for dif- 
ferent aerofoils at different angles, and then compares the best value of 
each aerofoil, it will be possible to decide the best aerofoil from this 
point of view. 
4. A Low Minimum Drag Coefficient. If high top speed rather than econom- 
ical cruise is important for an aircraft, then we will need low drag at small 
lift coefficient, and hence small angles of attack. The drag coefficient at 
these small angles of attack will be related to the minimum drag coefficient 
(Fig. 3.15). 
5. A Small and Stable Movement of Centre of Pressure. The centre of 
pressure of our aerofoil moves between 0.75 and 0.30 of the chord during 
ordinary flight; we would like to restrict this movement because if we can 
rely upon the greatest pressures on the wing remaining in one fixed pos- 
12 
91 
AEROFOILS -- SUBSONIC SPEEDS 
ition we can reduce the weight of the structure required to carry these 
pressures. We would also like the movement to be in the stable rather than 
in the unstable direction. 
Looking at this another way: as we have explained, the moment coeffi- 
cient at zero lift is slightly negative on most aerofoils, and about the 
leading edge becomes more nose-down as the angle of attack is increased, 
and this tends towards stability. Yes, but our real reference point should 
be about the centre of gravity and, as we have also explained, this is 
usually not only behind the leading edge but also behind the aerodynamic 
centre, and may even be behind the trailing edge. So, in fact, this is not 
what we want for stability about the centre of gravity. On the contrary, we 
would prefer the exact opposite, i.e. a slight positive (nose-up) moment 
coefficient at zero lift, and this decreasing to negative as the angle of attack 
is increased. Most aerofoil sections do not give this; but later we shall find 
that there are means of achieving it. 
6. Sufficient Depth to enable Good Spars to be Used. Here we are up against 
an altogether different problem. Inside the wing must run the spars, or 
other internal members, which provide the strength of the structure. Now 
the greater the depth of a spar, the less will be its weight for a given 
strength. We must therefore try to find aerofoils which are deep and which 
at the same time have good characteristics from the flight point of view. 
Compromises 
So much for the ideal aerofoil. Unfortunately, as with most ideals, we find that 
no practical aerofoil will meet all the requirements. In fact, attempts to 
improve an aerofoil from one point of view usually make it worse from other 
points of view, until we are forced either to go all out for one characteristic, 
such as maximum speed, or to take a happy mean of all the good qualities -- 
in other words, to make a compromise, and all compromises are bad! It is 
perhaps well that we have introduced the word 'compromise' at this stage, 
because the more one understands about aeroplanes the more one realises that 
an aeroplane is from beginning to end a compromise. We want an aeroplane 
which will do this, we want an aeroplane which will do that; we cannot get an 
aeroplane which will do both this and that, therefore we make an aeroplane 
which will half do this and half do that -- a 'half and half affair'. And of all the 
compromises which go to make up that final great compromise, the finished 
aeroplane, the shape of the aerofoil is the first, and perhaps the greatest, com- 
promise. 
92 MECHANICS OF FLIGHT 
Camber 
How can we alter the shape of the aerofoil section in an attempt to obtain 
better results? The main changes that we can make are in the curvature, or 
camber, of the centre line, i.e. the line equidistant from the upper and lower 
surfaces, and in the position of the maximum camber along the chord. 
In symmetrical sections, some of which have been very successful, there is 
of course no camber of the centre line; other sections have centre line cambers 
of up to 4 per cent or more of the chord. 
Generally speaking we get good all-round characteristics and a smooth stall 
when the maximum camber is situated about 40 per cent of the chord back. 
Aerofoils with the maximum camber well forward, say at 15 per cent to 20 
per cent of the chord, may have low drag but are apt to have poor stall charac- 
teristics -- a rather sudden breakaway of the airflow. 
The other main features that can be varied are the maximum thickness, the 
variation of thickness along the chord and the position of maximum thickness 
-- not necessarily the same as that of maximum camber. There is considerable 
variation of maximum thickness (Fig. 3.21) even in commonly used aerofoils, 
from very thin sections with about 6 per cent of the chord to thick sections 
of 18 per cent or more. Reasonably thick sections are best at low speed, and 
for pure weight carrying, thin ones for high speed. Remember that it is the 
thickness compared with the chord that matters, thus the Concorde with its 
large chord of nearly 30 metres achieved a remarkable thickness/chord ratio 
of 3 per cent. 
The greater the camber of the centre line the more convex will be the upper 
surface, while the lower surface may be only slightly convex, flat or even 
slightly concave (though this is rare in modern types). Sometimes there is a 
93 
AEROFOILS -- SUBSONIC SPEEDS 
Medium aerofoil (10%) "general purpose" 
Thick aerofoil (15%) " 
Transonic aerofoil (10%) "high subsonic speed" 
high lift " 
Thin aerofoil (7%) "high speed" 
Fig 3.21 Thickness of aerofoil sections 
reflex curve of the centre line towards the trailing edge (Fig. 3.12); this tends 
to reduce the movement of the centre of pressure and makes for stability. 
Laminar flow aerofoils 
The attainment of really high speeds, speeds approaching and exceeding that 
at which sound travels in air, has caused new problems in the design and in the 
flying of aeroplanes. Not the least of these problems is the shape of the aero- 
foil section. 
Speed is a comparative quantity and the term 'high speed' is often used 
rather vaguely; in fact, the problem changes considerably at the various stages 
of high speed. In general, we may say that we have so far been considering 
aerofoil sections that are suitable for speeds up to 400 or 500 km/h (say 220 
to 270 knots) -- and we must remember that although these speeds have now 
been far exceeded they can hardly be considered as dawdling. Furthermore all 
aeroplanes, however fast they may fly, must pass through this important 
region. At the other end of the scale are speeds near and above the so-called 
'sound barrier', shall we say from 800 km/h (430 knots) up to -- well, what you 
will! The problems of such speeds will be dealt with in later chapters. Notice 
that there is a gap, from about 500 to 800 km/h (say 270 to 430 knots), and 
this gap has certain problems of its own; among other things, it is in this 
region that the so-called laminar flow aerofoil sections have proved of most 
value. 
The significance of the boundary layer was explained in Chapter 2. 
Research on the subject led to the introduction of the laminar flow or low drag 
aerofoil, so designed as to maintain laminar flow over as much of the surface 
as possible. By painting the wings with special chemicals the effect of turbu- 
lent flow in the boundary layer can be detected and so the transition point, 
where the flow changes from laminar to turbulent, can actually be found both 
on models and in full-scale flight. Experiments on these lines have led to the 
conclusion that the transition point commonly occurs where the airflow over 
the surface begins to slow down, in other words at or slightly behind the point 
of maximum suction. So long as the velocity of airflow over the surface is 
increasing the flow in the boundary layer remains laminar, so it is necessary to 
maintain the increase over as much of the surface as possible. The aerofoil that 
was evolved as a result of these researches (Fig. 3.22) is thin, the leading edge 
is more pointed than in the older conventional shape, the section is nearly sym- 
metrical and, most important of all, the point of maximum camber (of the 
centre line) is much farther back than usual, sometimes as much as 50 per cent 
of the chord back. 
The pressure distribution over these aerofoils is more even, and the airflow 
is speeded up very gradually from the leading edge to the point of maximum 
camber. 
94 MECHANICS OF FLIGHT 
There are, of course, snags -- and quite a lot of them. It is one thing to design 
an aerofoil section that has the desirable characteristics at a small angle of 
attack, but what happens when the angle of attack is increased? As one would 
expect, the transition point moves rapidly forward! It has been found possible, 
however, to design some sections in which the low drag is maintained over a 
reasonable range of angles. Other difficulties are that the behaviour of these 
aerofoils near the stall is inferior to the conventional aerofoil and the value of 
CLmax is low, so stalling speeds are high. Also, the thin wing is contrary to 
one of the characteristics we sought in the ideal aerofoil. 
But by far the most serious problem has been that wings of this shape are 
very sensitive to slight changes of contour such as are within the tolerances 
usually allowed in manufacture. The slightest waviness of the surface, or even 
dust, or flies, or raindrops that may alight on the surface, especially near the 
leading edge and, worst of all, the formation of ice -- any one of these may be 
sufficient to cause the transition point to move right up to the position where 
the irregularity first occurs, thus causing all the boundary layer to become tur- 
bulent and the drag due to skin friction to be even greater than on the 
conventional aerofoil. This is a very serious matter, and led to the tightening 
up of manufacturing and maintenance tolerances. 
With swept wings, the flow along the leading edge towards the tip usually 
causes transition to occur very near the leading edge and nullifying the effect 
of any laminar flow section. Because of scale effect, this may not happen on a 
wind tunnel model, making testing all the more difficult. 
Another and more drastic method of controlling the boundary layer is to 
provide a source of suction, with the object of 'sucking the boundary layer 
away' before it goes turbulent. 
This has the advantage that a much thicker wing section can be used (Fig. 
3.23). The practical difficulty is in the power and weight involved in providing 
a suitable source of suction. Laminar boundary layers separate from the 
surface more easily than turbulent layers and suction may also be applied just 
before the point of separation to prevent this happening. Both suction and 
blowing (Fig. 3.24, overleaf) may also be used to prevent the separation of the 
turbulent boundary layer on an ordinary aerofoil. 
95 
AEROFOILS -- SUBSONIC SPEEDS 
Fig 3.22 Laminar flow aerofoil section 
Source of 
suction 
Fig 3.23 Control of boundary layer by suction (schematic drawing) 
Design and nomenclature of aerofoil sections 
In the early days, in fact until the late 1930s, very few aerofoil shapes were 
suggested by theory; the usual method was to sketch out a shape by eye, give 
it a thorough test and then try to improve on it by slight modifications. As a 
result of this method we had a mass of experimental data obtained under 
varying conditions in the various wind tunnels of the world. The results were 
interpreted in different ways, and several systems of units and symbols were 
used, so that it was difficult for the student or aeronautical engineer to make 
use of the data available. 
It is true that this hit-and-miss method of aerofoil design produced a few 
excellent sections but it was gradually replaced by more systematic methods. 
The first step in this direction was to design and test a 'family' of aerofoils by 
taking a standard symmetrical section and altering the curvature, or camber, 
of its centre line. An early example of this resulted in the RAF series of aero- 
foils in the UK (RAF referred to the Royal Aircraft Factory). In Germany 
similar investigations were made with series named after the Gottingen 
Laboratory, and in America with the Clark Y series. 
Later sections have been based on theoretical calculations but, whatever the 
basis of the original design, we still rely on wind tunnel tests to decide the 
qualities of the aerofoil. 
The naming and numbering of sections has also been rather haphazard. At 
first the actual number, such as RAF 15, meant nothing except perhaps that it 
was the 15th section to be tried. But the National Advisory Committee for 
Aeronautics in America soon attempted to devise a system whereby the letters 
and numbers denoting the aerofoil section served as a guide to its main fea- 
tures; this meant that we could get a good idea of what the section was like 
simply from its number. Unfortunately the system has been changed from time 
to time, and this has caused confusion; while the modern tendency to have 
more figures and letters in a number has resulted in such complication that 
the student finds it more difficult to get information about the section from 
the number than he did with some of the earlier ones. However since NACA 
sections, or slight modifications of them, are now used by nearly every 
country in the world, the reader may be interested in getting some idea of the 
systems. 
The geometric features that have most effect on the qualities of an aerofoil 
section are -- 
96 MECHANICS OF FLIGHT 
Source of 
pressure 
Fig 3.24 Control of boundary layer by pressure (schematic drawing) 
(a) the camber of the centre line; 
(b) the position of maximum camber; 
(c) the maximum thickness, and variation of thickness along the chord; 
and, perhaps rather surprisingly -- 
(d) the radius of curvature of the leading edge; 
(e) whether the centre line is straight, or reflexed near the trailing edge; and 
the angle between the upper and lower surfaces at the trailing edge. 
The NACA sections designed for comparatively low speed aircraft are based 
on either the four- or five-digit system; laminar flow sections for high subsonic 
speeds on the 6, 7 or 8 systems (the 6, 7 or 8 being the first figure, not the 
number of digits). 
In each system there are complicated formulae for the thickness distri- 
bution, the radius of the leading edge and the shape of the centre line, but we 
need not worry about these; what is easier to understand is the meaning of the 
digits or integers, for instance, in the four-digit system -- 
(a) the first digit gives the maximum camber as a percentage of the chord; 
(b) the second digit gives the position of the maximum camber, i.e. distance 
from the leading edge, in tenths of the chord; 
(c) the third and fourth digits indicate the maximum thickness as a percentage 
of the chord. 
Thus NACA 4412 has a maximum camber of 4 per cent of the chord, the pos- 
ition of this maximum camber is 40 per cent of the chord back, and the 
maximum thickness is 12 per cent of the chord. In a symmetrical section there 
is of course no camber so the first two digits will be zero; thus NACA 0009 is 
a symmetrical section of 9 per cent thickness. 
Notice that these are all geometric features of the section, but in later 
systems attempts are made to indicate also some of the aerodynamic charac- 
teristics, for instance, in the five-digit system -- 
(a) the 'design lift coefficient' (in tenths) is three-halves of the first digit; 
(b) the second and third digits together indicate twice the distance back of the 
maximum camber, as a percentage of the chord; 
(c) and the last two once again the maximum thickness. 
The 'design lift coefficient' is the lift coefficient at the angle of attack for 
normal level flight, usually at about 2° or 3°. 
97 
AEROFOILS -- SUBSONIC SPEEDS 
Most of these sections have a 2 per cent camber, and in fact there is some 
relationship between the design lift coefficient and the maximum camber 
which has sometimes led to confusion about the meaning of the first digit; also 
the point of maximum camber is well forward at 15 per cent, 20 per cent or 
25 per cent of the chord (which accounts for the doubling of the second and 
third digits to 30, 40 or 50). In fact the most successful, and so the most 
common of these sections, begins with the digits 230, followed by the last two 
indicating the thickness. Thus NACA 23012, as used on the Britten-Norman 
Islander, has a design lift coefficient of 0.3 (it also has 2 per cent camber), the 
maximum camber is at 15 per cent of the chord, while the maximum thickness 
is 12 per cent. 
The forward position of the maximum camber in the five-digit sections 
results in low drag, but poor stalling characteristics, which explains why, when 
these sections are used near the root of a wing, they are often changed to a 
four-digit one (which gives a smooth stall) near the tip. 
It should be noted that the position of maximum thickness (not indicated in 
either of these systems) is not necessarily the same as that of maximum 
camber, and in one British system eight digits were used so that this too could 
be indicated; two pairs of digits gave the thickness and its position, two other 
pairs the maximum camber and its position. Figure 3.25 illustrates 1240/0658 
based on this system. For a symmetrical section the last four figures are 
omitted since they would all have been zero. 
The reader may like to sketch for himself such sections as NACA 4412 and 
23012, but he will have to judge the position of maximum thickness by eye. 
In the NACA 6, 7 and 8 series, as in nearly all the NACA series, the last 
two digits again indicate the percentage thickness, but the other figures, letters, 
suffixes, dashes and brackets become so complicated that it is necessary to 
refer to tables. Most of these sections are particularly good for high subsonic 
speeds. 
Many aircraft now use "tailor made" sections. This is particularly the case 
with transonic transport aircraft, which are designed to very fine limits to 
improve economy. 
98 MECHANICS OF FLIGHT 
Max. thickness 12% 
Max. camber 0.6% 
L.E. 
T.E. 
40% of chord 
58% of chord 
Fig 3.25 Aerofoil section 1240/0658 
Aspect ratio 
We have so far only considered aerofoils from the point of view of their cross- 
section, and we must now consider the effect of the plan form. Suppose we 
have a rectangular wing of 12 m2 plan area; it could be of 6 m span and 2 m 
chord, or 8 m span and 1.5 m chord, or even 16 m span and 0.75 m chord. In 
each case the cross-sectional shape may be the same although, of course, to a 
different scale, depending on the chord. Now according to the conclusions at 
which we have already arrived, the lift and drag are both proportional to the 
area of the wing, and therefore since all of these wings have the same area they 
should all have the same lift and drag. Experiments, however, show that this 
is not exactly true and indicate a definite, though small, advantage to the 
wings with larger spans, both from the point of view of lift and lift/drag ratio. 
The ratio span/chord is called aspect ratio (Fig. 3.26), and the aspect ratios 
of those wings which we have mentioned are therefore 3, 5.33 and 21.33 
respectively, and the last one, with its 'high aspect ratio', gives the best results 
(at any rate at subsonic speeds which is what we are concerned with in this 
chapter). Why? It is a long story, and some of it is beyond the scope of this 
book; but the reader has the right to ask for some sort of explanation of one 
of the most interesting and, in some ways, one of the most important, prob- 
lems of flight. So here goes! 
Induced drag 
Experiments with smoke or streamers show quite clearly that the air flowing 
over the top surface of a wing tends to flow inwards (Fig. 3.27, overleaf). This 
is because the decreased pressure over the top surface is less than the pressure 
outside the wing tip. Below the under-surface, on the other hand, the air flows 
outwards, because the pressure below the wing is greater than that outside the 
99 
AEROFOILS -- SUBSONIC SPEEDS 
Span6m 
Span8m 
Low aspect ratio 
Medium aspect ratio 
Chord 2 m
Chord 1.5 m
Chord 0.75 m
Span 16 m 
High aspect ratio 
Fig. 3.26 Aspect ratio 
The area of each wing is 12 m2. 
wing tip. Thus there is a continual spilling of the air round the wing tip, from 
the bottom surface to the top. Perhaps the simplest way of explaining why a 
high aspect ratio is better than a low one is to say that the higher the aspect 
ratio the less is the proportion of air which is thus spilt and so is ineffective in 
providing lift -- the less there is of what is sometimes called 'tip effect' or 'end 
effect'. 
When the two airflows, from the top and bottom surfaces, meet at the 
trailing edge they are flowing at an angle to each other and cause vortices 
rotating clockwise (viewed from the rear) from the left wing, and anti-clock- 
wise from the right wing. All the vortices on one side tend to join up and form 
one large vortex which is shed from each wing tip (Fig. 3.28). These are called 
wing-tip vortices. 
All this is happening every time and all the time an aeroplane is flying, yet 
some pilots do not even know the existence of such vortices. Perhaps it is just 
as well, perhaps it is a case of ignorance being bliss. In earlier editions of this 
book it was suggested that if only pilots could see the vortices, how they would 
talk about them! Well, by now most pilots have seen the vortices or, to be more 
correct, the central core of the vortex, which is made visible by the condensa- 
tion of moisture caused by the decrease of pressure in the vortex (Figs 3A and 
3B, overleaf). These visible (and sometimes audible!) trails from the wing tips 
should not be confused with the vapour trails caused by condensation taking 
place in the exhaust gases of engines at high altitudes (Fig. 3C, overleaf). 
Now if you consider which way these vortices are rotating you will realise 
that there is an upward flow of air outside the span of the wing and a down- 
100 MECHANICS OF FLIGHT 
Airflow over top surface 
Airflow over bottom surface 
Angle of inclination steadily increasing from centre to tip 
Fig 3.27 The cause of trailing vortices 
Fig 3.28 Trailing vortices which become wing-tip vortices 
ward flow of air behind the trailing edge of the wing itself. This means that the 
net direction of flow past a wing is pulled downwards. Therefore the lift -- 
which is at right angles to the airflow -- is slightly backwards, and thus con- 
tributes to the drag (Fig. 3.29). This part of the drag is called induced drag. 
In a sense, induced drag is caused by the lift; so long as we have lift we must 
have induced drag, and we can never eliminate it altogether however cleverly 
the wings are designed. But the greater the aspect ratio, the less violent are the 
wing-tip vortices, and the less the induced drag. If we could imagine a wing of 
infinite aspect ratio, the air would flow over it without any inward or outward 
deflection, there would be no wing-tip vortices, no induced drag. Clearly such 
a thing is impossible in practical flight, but it is interesting to note that an aero- 
foil in a wind tunnel may approximate to this state of affairs if it extends to 
the wind-tunnel walls at each side, or outside the jet stream in an open jet type 
of tunnel. The best we can do in practical design is to make the aspect ratio as 
large as is practicable. Unfortunately a limit is soon reached -- from the struc- 
tural point of view. The greater the span, the greater must be the wing 
strength, the heavier must be the structure, and so eventually the greater 
weight of structure more than counterbalances the advantages gained. Again 
it is a question of compromise. In practice, aspect ratios for flight at subsonic 
speeds vary from 6 to 1 up to about 10 to 1 for ordinary aeroplanes, but con- 
siderably higher values may be found on sailplanes, and even more in 
man-powered aircraft, where aerodynamic efficiency must take precedence 
over all other considerations (see Fig. 3D, later) and very low values for flight 
101 
AEROFOILS -- SUBSONIC SPEEDS 
Fig 3A Wing-tip vortices 
(By courtesy of the former British Aircraft Corporation, Preston) 
The low pressure at the core of the vortex causes a local condensation fog 
on a damp day. 
at transonic and supersonic speeds (see Fig. 3E, later). Fig. 3.30 shows how 
aspect ratio affects the lift curve, not only in the maximum value of CL but in 
the slope of the curve, the stalling angle actually being higher with low values 
of aspect ratio. Notice that the angle of no lift is unaffected by aspect ratio. 
The theory of induced drag can be worked out mathematically and experi- 
ment confirms the theoretical results. The full calculation involved would be 
102 MECHANICS OF FLIGHT 
Fig 3B Rolling up of vortices 
(By courtesy of the former British Aircraft Corporation, Preston) 
A unique demonstration of the rolling up process; the wing tip and flap tip 
are each shedding vortices that are strong enough to cause condensation, 
and the pair roll around one another. 
Induced drag 
Direction of lift 
tilted backwards 
owing to 
deflection of 
airflow 
Direction of 
airflow at a 
distance from 
aerofoil 
Direction of airflow 
past aerofoil 
Fig 3.29 Induced drag 
103 
AEROFOILS -- SUBSONIC SPEEDS 
Fig 3C Exhaust trails 
(By courtesy of General Dynamics Corporation, USA) 
A modified B36 with 6 piston engines and 4 jet engines, and carrying an 
atomic reactor as an experiment on the shielding of crews and aircraft 
components. 
Low aspect ratio 
High aspect ratio 
Angle of attack 
--4° 
0° 
4° 
8° 
12° 
16° 
1.2 
1.0 
0.8 
0.6 
0.4 
0.2 
Max CL 
Max CL 
CL 
Fig 3.30 How aspect ratio affects the lift curve 
out of place in a book of this kind, but the answer is quite simple and the 
reader may like to know it, especially since it helps to give a clearer impression 
of the significance of this part of the drag. 
The coefficient of induced drag is found to be CL2/pA for wings with an 
elliptical planform, where A is the aspect ratio and CL the lift coefficient (the 
value for tapered wings may be 10 per cent to 20 per cent higher, depending 
on the degree of taper). This means that the actual drag caused by the vortices 
is (CL2/pA) . rV2 . S, but since the rV2 . S applies to all aerodynamic forces, 
it is sufficient to consider the significance of the coefficient, 
CL2/pA . In the first place, the fact that A is underneath in the fraction confirms 
our previous statement that the greater the aspect ratio, the less the induced 
drag; but it tells us even more than this, for it shows that it is a matter of 
simple proportion: if the aspect ratio is doubled, the induced drag is halved. 
The significance of the CL2 is perhaps not quite so easy to understand. CL is 
large when the angle of attack is large, that is to say when the speed of the air- 
craft is low; so induced drag is relatively unimportant at high speed (probably 
less than 10 per cent of the total drag), more important when climbing (when 
it becomes 20 per cent or more of the total) and of great importance for taking 
off (when it may be as high as 70 per cent of the total). In fact, the induced 
drag is inversely proportional to the square of the speed, whereas all the 
remainder of the drag is directly proportional to the square of the speed. 
It is easy to work out simple examples on induced drag, e.g. -- 
A monoplane wing of area 36 m2 has a span of 15 m and chord of 2.4 m. 
What is the induced drag coefficient when the lift coefficient is 1.2? 
Aspect ratio A 15/2.4 6.25 
Induced drag coefficient CL2/pA 5 1.22/6.25p 0.073 
Perhaps this does not convey much to us, so let us work out the actual drag 
involved, assuming that the speed corresponding to a CL of 1.2 is 52 knots, i.e. 
96 km/h (26.5 m/s), and that the air density is 1.225 kg/m3. 
Induced drag (CL2/pA ) . rV2 . S 
0.073 
1.225 26.52 36 
 1130N 
12 
12 
12 
12 
104 MECHANICS OF FLIGHT 
Fig 3D High aspect ratio (opposite) 
(By courtesy of Paul MacCready) 
The Gossamer Condor. Flight on one man-power requires a very high 
value of lift/drag. 
105 
AEROFOILS -- SUBSONIC SPEEDS 
Let us take it even one step further and find the power required to overcome 
this induced drag -- 
Power DV 1130 3 26.5 30 kW (about 40 horse-power). 
This example will help the reader to realise that induced drag is something to 
be reckoned with; it is advisable to work out similar examples, which will be 
found at the end of the book. 
Circulation 
An interesting way of thinking about the airflow over wings and wing-tip vor- 
tices is the theory of circulation. The fact that the air is speeded up over the 
upper surface, and slowed down on the under surface of a wing, can be con- 
sidered as a circulation round the wing superimposed upon the general speed 
of the airflow (this does not mean that particles of air actually travel round the 
wing). This circulation is, in effect, the cause of lift. If we now consider this 
circulation as slipping off each wing tip, and continuing downstream, we have 
the wing-tip vortices; and they rotate, as already established, downwards 
behind the wing and upwards outside the wing tips. 
But this is not all. When the wing starts to move, or when the lift is 
increased, the wing sheds and leaves behind a vortex rotating in the opposite 
direction to the circulation round the wing -- sometimes called the starting 
vortex -- so there is a complete system of vortices, round the wing, then the 
wing-tip vortices, and finally the starting vortex. The wing-tip vortices and the 
starting vortex are gradually damped out with time -- owing to viscosity -- but 
the exertion of engine power (which ultimately is what creates the vortices, 
and so the lift and induced drag) keeps renewing the circulation round the 
wing, and the wing-tip vortices which result from it. 
This is not just a theory; the flow over the wing can be clearly seen in 
experiments, as can the wing-tip vortices, while the starting vortex is easily 
demonstrated by starting to move a model wing, or even one's hand, through 
water. But perhaps the most extraordinary example of the reality of the effect 
of aspect ratio on circulation and wing-tip vortices is that by clever forma- 
tion flying of say three or five aircraft, with the centre one leading, and 
the outer ones with their wing tips just behind the opposite wing tips of the 
106 MECHANICS OF FLIGHT 
Fig 3E Low aspect ratio (opposite) 
(By courtesy of the Grumman Corporation, USA) 
For high-speed flight, the wings of the F14 are swung back producing an 
aspect ratio of less than 1. For low-speed flight they can be swung forward 
giving a higher aspect ratio. 
107 
AEROFOILS -- SUBSONIC SPEEDS 
leading aircraft, it is possible to achieve something of the same result (which 
is illustrated in flying for maximum range) as with an aircraft of three or five 
times the span! This is hardly a practical proposition for flying across the 
Atlantic, but it has been illustrated by careful experiment, and geese and 
other birds used the technique long before we discovered it! 
Taper and shape of wing tips 
In addition to changes of aspect ratio, the plan form of the wing may be 
tapered from centre to wing tip; this is often accompanied by a taper in the 
depth of the aerofoil section (Fig. 3.31) and also by a 'wash-out', or decrease 
of angle of incidence, towards the wing tip -- sometimes too a different aero- 
foil section is used near the tips. The tapered wing has advantages both from 
the structural and aerodynamic points of view. This is a feature in which we 
were slow to accept the teachings of nature, for the wings of most birds have 
a decided taper. Where the chord is not constant along the span, the numer- 
ical value of the aspect ratio is usually taken as the fraction (span/mean chord), 
or span2/area. 
Taper in plan form means a sweepback of the leading edge, or a sweepfor- 
ward of the trailing edge, or both. Considerable sweepback of the whole wing 
108 MECHANICS OF FLIGHT 
Fig 3.31 Tapered wing 
is sometimes used, but this is usually more for consideration of stability or for 
very high-speed flight, and discussion of the problem from these points of view 
is deferred to later chapters. 
Variable camber 
Many attempts have been made to provide aerofoils with some kind of vari- 
able camber so that the pilot might be able to alter his aerofoil from a high-lift 
type to a high-speed type at will. Owing to the tremendous advantage to be 
gained by such a device, it is not surprising to find that much ingenuity has 
been expended, many patents have been taken out, and it is not easy to 
compare the rival merits of the various slots, flaps, slotted flaps, and so on. 
Figure 3.32 (overleaf) shows some of the devices with the increase in 
maximum lift claimed for each, but we must not take these figures as the only 
guide to the usefulness or otherwise of each device, because there are other 
points to be considered besides maximum lift. For instance, we may want a 
good ratio of maximum CL to minimum CD (which indicates a good speed 
range), or an increase in drag as well as lift, the flaps acting as an air brake, 
which may be useful in increasing the gliding angle (explained later). Another 
important consideration is the simplicity of the device; anything which needs 
complicated operating mechanism will probably mean more weight, more 
controls for the pilot to work, something more to go wrong. 
Flaps and slots 
Although there is a large variety of high-lift devices nearly all of them can be 
classed as either slots or flaps -- or a combination of the two (Fig. 3.32). 
Slots may be subdivided into -- 
(a) Fixed slots. 
(b) Controlled slots. 
(c) Automatic slots. 
(d) Blown slots. 
Flaps may be subdivided into -- 
(a) Camber flaps. 
(b) Split flaps. 
109 
AEROFOILS -- SUBSONIC SPEEDS 
(c) Slotted flaps. 
(d) Lift flaps. 
(e) Blown flaps. 
(f) Jet flaps. 
(g) Nose flaps. 
(h) Spoilers. 
(i) Lift dumpers. 
(j) Air brakes. 
We can also classify the effects of both slots and flaps on the characteristics of 
an aerofoil by saying that their use may cause one or more of the following -- 
(a) Increase of Lift. 
(b) Increase of Drag. 
(c) Change of Stalling Angle. 
(d) Decrease of Lift. 
(e) Change of Trim. 
Slots 
If a small auxiliary aerofoil, called a slat, is placed in front of the main aero- 
foil, with a suitable gap or slot in between the two (Fig. 3F, overleaf), the 
maximum lift coefficient of the aerofoil may be increased by as much as 60 per 
cent (Fig. 3.33, overleaf). Moreover the stalling angle may be increased from 
15° to 22° or more, not always an advantage as we shall discover when we 
consider the problems of landing. An alternative to the separate slat, simpler 
but not so effective, is to cut one or more slots in the basic aerofoil itself, 
forming as it were a slotted wing. 
The reason behind these results is clearly shown in Fig. 3.34 (later). Stalling 
is caused by the breakdown of the steady streamline airflow. On a slotted wing 
the air flows through the gap in such a way as to keep the airflow smooth, fol- 
lowing the contour of the surface of the aerofoil, and continuing to provide lift 
until a much greater angle is reached. Numerous experiments confirm this con- 
clusion. It is, in effect, a form of boundary layer control as described earlier. 
The extra lift enables us to obtain a lower landing or stalling speed, and this 
was the original idea. If the slots are permanently open, i.e. fixed slots, the 
extra drag at high speed is a disadvantage, so most slots in commercial use are 
110 MECHANICS OF FLIGHT 
111 
AEROFOILS -- SUBSONIC SPEEDS 
Remarks 
Increase 
of 
maximum 
lift 
Angle 
of basic 
aerofoil 
at 
max. lift 
High-lift devices 
Increase camber and 
wing area. Best flaps 
for lift. Complicated 
mechanism. Nose-down 
pitching moment. 
Effects of all high-lift 
devices depend on 
shape of basic aerofoil. 
Increase camber. Much 
drag when fully lowered. 
Nose-down pitching 
moment. 
Increase camber. Even 
more drag than plain 
flap. Nose-down 
pitching moment. 
Increase camber and 
wing area. Much drag. 
Nose-down pitching 
moment. 
Control of boundary 
layer. Increase camber. 
Stalling delayed. Not 
so much drag. 
Same as single-slotted 
flap only more so. 
Treble slots sometimes 
used. 
15° 
-- 
50% 
12° 
60% 
14° 
90% 
13° 
65% 
16° 
70% 
18° 
90% 
15° 
Basic aerofoil 
Plain or camber flap 
Split flap 
Zap flap 
Slotted flap 
Double-slotted flap 
Fowler flap 
Fig 3.32 High lift devices 
Note. Since the effects of these devices depend upon the shape of the 
basic aerofoil, and the exact design of the devices themselves, the values 
given can only be considered as approximations. To simplify the diagram 
the aerofoils and the flaps have been set at small angles, and not at the 
angles giving maximum lift. 
112 MECHANICS OF FLIGHT 
Remarks 
Increase 
of 
maximum 
lift 
Angle 
of basic 
aerofoil 
at 
max. lift 
High-lift devices 
Same as Fowler flap only 
more so. Treble slots 
sometimes used. 
20° 
100% 
Double-slotted Fowler flap 
Nose-flap hinging about 
leading edge. Reduces 
lift at small deflections. 
Nose-up pitching 
moment. 
25° 
50% 
Krueger flap 
20° 
40% 
Slotted wing 
20° 
50% 
Fixed slat 
22° 
60% 
Movable slat 
25° 
75% 
Slat and slotted flap 
28° 
120% 
Slat and 
double-slotted Fowler flap 
16° 
80% 
Blown flap 
? 
60% 
Jet flap 
Controls boundary layer. 
Slight extra drag at high 
speeds. 
Controls boundary layer. 
Extra drag at high 
speeds. Nose-up 
pitching moment. 
Controls boundary layer. 
Increases camber and 
area. Greater angles of 
attack. Nose-up 
pitching moment. 
More control of boundary 
layer. Increased camber 
and area. Pitching 
moment can be 
neutralised. 
Complicated mechanisms. 
The best combination for 
lift; treble slots may be 
used. Pitching moment 
can be neutralised. 
Effect depends very 
much on details of 
arrangement. 
Depends even more 
on angle and velocity 
of jet. 
Fig 3.32 continued 
113 
AEROFOILS -- SUBSONIC SPEEDS 
Fig 3F Leading edge slat and slot 
(By courtesy of Fiat Aviazione, Torino, Italy) 
4.0 
3.0 
2.0 
1.0 
--10° 
--5° 
0° 
5° 
10° 
15° 
20° 
25° 
30° 
Angle of attack 
Lift coefficient
Max CL 
4.0 at 28° 
Max CL 
3.2 at 22° 
Max CL 
2.4 at 22° 
Max CL 
1.6 at 15° 
Plain wing 
Wing with slots 
Wing with high-lift flaps 
Wing with high-lift 
flaps and slots 
Fig 3.33 Effect of flaps and slots on maximum lift coefficient and 
stalling angle 
114 MECHANICS OF FLIGHT 
Fig 3.34 Effect of slot on airflow over an aerofoil at large angle of attack 
controlled slots, that is to say, the slat is moved backwards and forwards by a 
control mechanism; and so can be closed for high-speed flight and opened for 
low speeds. In the early days experiments were made which revealed that, if 
left to itself, the slat would move forward of its own accord. So automatic slots 
came into their own; in these the slat is moved by the action of air pressure, 
i.e. by making use of that forward and upward suction near the leading edge. 
Figure 3.35 shows how the force on the slat inclines forward as the stalling 
angle is reached. The opening of the slot may be delayed or hastened by 'vents' 
at the trailing or leading edge of the slat respectively (Fig. 3.36), and there may 
be some kind of spring or tensioning device to prevent juddering, which may 
be otherwise likely to occur. It is also important to ensure that the slots open 
on both wings at the same time! 
Before leaving the subject of slots -- for the time being, at any rate -- there 
are a couple of interesting points which may be worth mentioning. Firstly, the 
value of the slot in maintaining a smooth airflow over the top surface of the 
wing can be materially enhanced by blowing air through the gap between slat 
and wing; this may be called a blown slot. Secondly, what might be called the 
'slot idea' may be extended to other parts of the aircraft. Specially shaped 
cowlings can be used to smooth the airflow over an engine, and fillets may be 
used at exposed joints, and other awkward places, to prevent the airflow sep- 
arating. 
Flaps 
The history of flaps is longer, and just as varied, as that of slots. The plain or 
camber flap works on the same principle as an aileron or other control surface; 
it is truly a 'variable camber'. Such flaps were used as early as the 1914--1918 
war, and the original idea was the same as with slots, to decrease landing speed 
with flaps down, and retain maximum speed with flaps up. Their early use was 
almost exclusively for deck-landing purposes. It seemed at first as though the 
invention of slots, which followed a few years after that war, might sound the 
death-knell of flaps. Far from it -- if anything it has been the other way round, 
for flaps have become a necessity on modern aircraft. Flaps, like slots, can 
increase lift -- honours are about even in this respect so far as the plain (or 
camber) flap, or split flap is concerned. But these flaps can also increase drag 
-- not, like slots, at high speed when it is not wanted, but at low speed when it 
is wanted. But the main difference between the effects of flaps and slots is 
shown in Fig. 3.33; from this it will be seen that whereas slots merely prolong 
the lift curve to higher values of the maximum lift coefficient, when the angle 
of attack of the main portion of the aerofoil is beyond the normal stalling 
angle, the high-lift type of flap increases the lift coefficient available 
throughout the whole range of angles of attack. 
However it is no longer appropriate to compare the relative merits of slots 
and flaps because in modern aircraft it is usual to combine the two in some 
115 
AEROFOILS -- SUBSONIC SPEEDS 
4° 
12° 
16° 
Fig 3.35 Direction of force on slat at varying angles of attack 
Region of 
decreased 
pressure 
Region of 
increased 
pressure 
Vent 
Vent 
To delay opening 
To hasten opening 
Fig 3.36 Effect of vents on opening of automatic slots 
form or other; and in this way to get the best of both devices (Fig. 3G). There 
is a large number of possible combinations, but Fig. 3.32 is an attempt to sum 
up the main varieties, and to describe the effect they have on the maximum lift 
coefficient, on the angle of the main aerofoil when maximum lift is obtained, 
why they improve the lift, what effects they have on the drag, how they affect 
the pitching moment, and so on. 
From this figure it will be seen that the simpler flaps such as the camber flap, 
split flap and single slotted flap give a good increase in maximum lift coeffi- 
cient at a reasonable angle of attack of the main aerofoil, and therefore a 
reasonable attitude of the aeroplane for landing; they also increase drag which 
is an advantage in the approach and landing. 
The more complicated types such as the Zap and Fowler flap, and the 
double- or treble-slotted flap, give an even greater increase in maximum lift 
coefficient, but still at a reasonable angle of attack; while the even more com- 
plicated combinations of slots and flaps give yet greater maximum lift 
coefficients, but usually at larger angles of attack, and of course at the expense 
of considerable complication (Fig. 3H, overleaf). 
Blown and jet flaps are in a class of their own since they depend on power 
to produce the blowing, and this may be a serious disadvantage in the event 
of power failure. The true jet flap isn't a flap at all, but simply an efflux of air, 
or a jet stream in the form of a sheet of air ejected under pressure at or near 
the trailing edge of the aerofoil. This helps to control the boundary layer, and 
if the sheet of air can be deflected the reaction of the jet will also contribute 
directly to the lift. 
The Krueger and other types of nose flap are used mainly for increasing lift 
for landing and take-off on otherwise high-speed aerofoils. 
Spoilers, air brakes, dive brakes, lift dumpers and suchlike are a special cat- 
egory in that their main purpose is to increase drag, or to destroy lift, or both; 
moreover, they need not necessarily be associated with the aerofoils (Fig. 3I, 
overleaf). They are used for various purposes on different types of aircraft; to 
spoil the L/D ratio and so steepen the gliding angle on high-performance 
sailplanes and other 'clean' aircraft; to check the speed before turning or 
manoeuvring; to assist both lateral and longitudinal control; to 'kill' the lift 
and provide a quick pull-up after landing; and on really high-speed aircraft to 
prevent the speed from reaching some critical value as in a dive. They will be 
considered later as appropriate to their various functions. 
116 MECHANICS OF FLIGHT 
Fig 3G Flaps and slats (opposite) 
Double-slotted flaps and leading edge slats are used on the Tornado. 
Because the flaps extend across the entire span, there is no room for 
ailerons, instead, the slab tailplane surfaces can move differentially as well 
as collectively, and this 'taileron' serves both for roll and pitch control. 
117 
AEROFOILS -- SUBSONIC SPEEDS 
Icing 
All these mechanical devices are designed to vary the characteristics of an 
aerofoil according to our needs, but there is one important form of variable 
camber which is the work of nature and over which we have little control, 
namely the formation of ice. Brief mention has already been made of this 
problem in connection with laminar flow aerofoils, but the effects of icing may 
be far wider than this, affecting as they do, not only the wings, but many parts 
of the aircraft, the engine intakes and even the propeller. Icing conditions can 
arise in various conditions of atmospheric humidity and temperature, but they 
become worse at regions of low pressure such as on the upper surface of wings 
near the leading edge, and at engine intakes -- just the places where any alter- 
ation of contour can be most serious. Apart from the effect on shape, the 
actual weight of accumulation of ice can be considerable and this alone has 
been the cause of accidents, as has also the breaking off of lumps of ice which 
may enter the engine or strike other parts of the aircraft. 
Many methods both of prevention and cure have been used to combat the 
ice problem, and they may be divided into three main categories -- mechanical 
methods (such as rubber overshoes alternately inflated and deflated) designed 
to break up the ice; heating methods (using the heat of the engines or separate 
heaters) designed to melt the ice on the leading edges of the wings, fins, engine 
intakes, etc.; and the use of special anti-icing fluid (about the only method suit- 
able for propellers where it is flung out from the hub). All these, necessary 
118 MECHANICS OF FLIGHT 
Fig 3H Multi-element slotted flaps 
Three-element slotted Fowler-type flaps extend rearwards and down as 
this Boeing 737 prepares to land. 
though they may be, mean extra weight and complication, and some of them 
absorb part of the engine power. 
Can you answer these? 
If you understand aerofoils you have broken the back of the problems of flight 
-- so test yourself with the following questions. 
1. How does the pressure distribution over an aerofoil change as we increase 
the angle of attack from negative values to beyond the stalling angle? 
2. What is meant by the centre of pressure of an aerofoil? 
3. Why is it more convenient to speak of the lift coefficient and drag coeffi- 
cient rather than the lift and drag of an aerofoil? 
4. What is meant by the aerodynamic centre of an aerofoil section? 
5. What do you understand by the stalling angle of an aerofoil? Why should 
one not talk about the stalling speed of an aerofoil? 
6. What is aspect ratio and what is its significance? 
For solutions see Appendix 5. 
For numerical examples see Appendix 3. 
119 
AEROFOILS -- SUBSONIC SPEEDS 
Fig 3I Speed brakes 
Speed brakes on the wings of the last Vulcan bomber (now sadly retired). 
The cables of a braking parachute can also just be seen trailing from the 
rear. 
Introduction 
In Chapter 2 we made a study of drag -- the force that tries to hold the aero- 
plane back. In this chapter we shall deal with thrust -- the force that opposes 
drag and keeps the aeroplane going forward. In steady level flight the thrust 
must be equal to the drag, in order to accelerate the aeroplane it must be 
greater than the drag, and in climbing it must also be greater than the drag 
because it will have to support some proportion of the weight. The actual con- 
ditions of balance of the forces will be dealt with in the next chapter; it is 
sufficient at this stage to realise that we must provide the aeroplane with con- 
siderable thrust, and that the performance that we can achieve from the 
aeroplane will be largely dependent upon the amount of thrust that we can 
provide. 
Once the aeroplane is clear of the ground, the only reasonable way of 
obtaining thrust is to push air or something else backwards and to rely on the 
reaction to push the aeroplane forwards. This is, in fact, what is done, and to 
save complication the same system is usually used while still on the ground. 
The precise physical process by which this reaction is produced and trans- 
mitted to the aircraft depends on the type of propulsion system used. 
The thrust-provider, of whatever kind it may be, must be supplied with 
energy. This will usually be in the form of a fuel, which is fed into some kind 
of 'engine' where, in burning, its chemical energy is changed into thermal 
energy, which in turn is converted into the mechanical work done in propelling 
the aeroplane against the drag. Methods of providing thrust differ only in the 
way in which these various conversions are effected, and in the efficiency of 
the conversion, that is to say in the proportion of useful work got out to the 
energy supplied. 
Thrust 
CHAPTER4 
Propulsion systems 
This is a book on the mechanics of flight, and it would be out of place to go 
into the thermodynamics of propulsion systems, but we will give a brief 
description of the basic principles of the more important methods of propul- 
sion. The oldest system, the piston-engine and propeller, is still in common use 
for light aircraft, and involves a large number of mechanical parts. The pro- 
peller itself is, of course, an almost entirely aerodynamic device. In the ramjet 
and rocket, described later, there are few significant mechanical parts, apart 
from fuel pumps, and the entire system relies entirely on aerodynamic and 
thermodynamic principles. Between the two extremes there are the jet and tur- 
boprop engines which involve a combination of mechanical and 
aero-thermodynamic principles. 
Turbojet propulsion 
Nowadays, the most common form of aircraft engine is the turbojet, which is 
normally just referred to as the jet engine. The turbojet is in principle, a very 
simple form of propulsion unit based on the gas turbine engine. A basic 
version is shown schematically in Fig 4.1. Air enters at the front and its 
pressure and temperature are raised by the action of the compressor. Heat is 
added in the combustion chamber by burning fuel (usually kerosene), and the 
heated air leaves at high speed. Part of the energy that it has gained is used to 
drive a turbine, which in turn drives the compressor. The air leaves as a high- 
speed jet. As the speed of the air has increased, the momentum has increased, 
and the reaction to this momentum change is a thrust force pushing the engine 
forward. The intake faces forward, in flight, so the air is effectively "rammed" 
in. This so-called ram effect helps to compress the air, and as the forward 
speed increases, less and less work has to be done by the compressor, leaving 
more of the energy increase to be used to generate thrust, so the efficiency of 
the propulsion system improves. 
121 
THRUST 
Combustion 
chamber 
Compressor 
Burners 
Inflow 
Turbine 
Fig 4.1 Principle of the turbojet 
The turbojet is much simpler than the "piston" engines that it has almost 
entirely displaced, and it has no reciprocating parts to wear and cause vibra- 
tions. Most importantly, it produces very much more thrust for a given weight 
at high speed. An added advantage is that it will work efficiently close to and 
beyond the speed of sound, where propellers cannot be used, as described 
later. 
The simple type of jet engine shown in Fig. 4.1 has now largely been 
replaced by the more efficient high by-pass and fan-jet engines described later 
in this chapter. 
Turboprop and turboshaft engines 
The turboprop engine is constructed in much the same way as the turbojet 
engine, but more of the available energy in the exhaust is used to drive the 
turbine. The extra power produced by the turbine is used to drive a propeller. 
Some thrust is produced by the exhaust jet, but this is only a relatively small 
proportion of the total. The advantage of the turboprop engine over the pure 
jet is that it is much more efficient. As we will see later, it is more efficient to 
produce thrust by giving a small increase in momentum to a large amount of 
air (as with a propeller), than to give a large increase in momentum to a small 
amount (as with a pure turbojet). However, as mentioned previously, pro- 
122 MECHANICS OF FLIGHT 
Fig 4A Turbojet propulsion 
The hot end of a MiG-29. Two Tumansky R-33D low-bypass turbojet 
engines, each producing 81.4 kN thrust (with reheat). Note the complex 
variable area outlet nozzles. 
pellers produce serious problems at high speed. They are also noisy, and 
require high maintenance, and require the addition of a heavy gearbox to 
reduce the turbine speed, which can be up to 100 000 rpm or more, down to 
the few thousand rpm required for a propeller. They are normally used for 
relatively low-speed aircraft such as small airliners or heavy-lift transport 
types (Fig. 4B). 
Instead of driving a propeller, the gas-turbine may be used to drive the 
rotor-blades of a helicopter, and in this application it is normally known as a 
turbo-shaft engine. Most military helicopters use turboshaft engines. 
Turboshaft engines are also used for purposes such as the production of aux- 
iliary electrical power. 
The ramjet and scramjet 
The ramjet engine will be mentioned here, because, although hardly ever used 
for aircraft, it is important for missiles and potentially important for the early 
stages of spacecraft flight. In principle, the ramjet is extremely simple, and, as 
123 
THRUST 
Fig 4B Turboprop propulsion 
The Lockheed Orion with four turboprops. Note the huge wide-chord 
'paddle-blade' propellers. 
shown in Fig. 4.2, consists of nothing more than a duct or tube of a special 
shape which faces the airflow in a moving aircraft. It relies on the forward 
speed to collect and compress the air, the so-called ram effect described in the 
preceding section. The air thus compressed flows past, a source of heat, such 
as a jet of burning fuel, as in a jet engine. From this, the air gains energy, 
flowing out faster than it entered. As with the jet engine, the reaction to this 
increase in air flow speed and momentum is a thrust force, which pushes the 
engine forward. This simple engine has no moving parts and there is almost 
nothing to go wrong. The exhaust air jet does not need to drive a turbine, and 
can be used entirely for direct thrust production. It should be noted that the 
shape of the duct is important. You cannot make a ramjet by burning fuel in 
a simple constant-bore tube; all you would get from that would be drag and 
some hot air. 
So if ramjets are so simple, why have they rarely been used on aircraft? The 
answer is that there is a major snag, and that is that they will only generate 
thrust efficiently at high speeds. In fact, they only start to become as efficient 
as a jet engine at several times the speed of sound. At zero forward speed they 
will not work at all, so any vehicle to be propelled by a ramjet must first be 
accelerated by some other type of engine or propulsion system. Ramjets have 
been used for missiles, as shown in Fig 4C. In this case, a simple rocket is used 
to propel the vehicle to a high speed, whereafter, the more efficient ramjet 
takes over. The rocket and ramjet combination thus gives a greater range than 
would be possible with the highly inefficient rocket engine alone. Ramjets have 
rarely been used on aircraft except for a few experimental types, but the SR71 
'Blackbird' spy-plane used a special engine which functioned as a turbojet 
engine at low speeds, and as a ramjet at high speeds. 
The scramjet (supersonic combusting ramjet) works on the same principle 
as the ramjet, but in this case, the air flow in the engine is everywhere super- 
sonic. In very high speed hypersonic flight this is necessary, because the 
thermodynamic efficiency becomes too low if the air speed is reduced to less 
than the speed of sound anywhere in the engine. The problem is that in a 
supersonic flow, the flame produced by burning simple fuels simply blows out. 
One solution is to use two fuels that react violently as they are mixed. This 
may be acceptable for military aircraft and missiles, but fare-paying passengers 
124 MECHANICS OF FLIGHT 
Intake 
diffuser 
Fuel 
spray 
Combustion 
chamber 
Fig 4.2 Principle of the ramjet 
might not relish the idea of sitting in an aircraft containing highly reactive 
fuels that must never meet except in the combustion chamber! 
Rocket propulsion 
Rocket propulsion is also very straightforward in principle. As illustrated in 
Fig 4.3 (overleaf), in the simplest motors, fuel is burned in a combustion 
chamber, to create heat and a high pressure gas. The hot gases then flow out 
through the specially-shaped throat and outlet nozzle at high speed. The main 
difference between the rocket and other forms of propulsion is that air is not 
used as the oxidant in the burning process, and the gases that are emitted from 
the outlet are all derived from the fuels. 
Apart from its use in some high speed research aircraft, and one highly dan- 
gerous German interceptor aircraft of Word War II (the Messerschmitt Me 
163), the rocket is mainly used for missiles and spacecraft. The strange vehicle 
shown in Fig. 4D (overleaf), which used a rocket both for propulsion and lift, 
never developed into a practical means of transport. 
Rocket motors come in two basic types, a solid fuel type, where the fuel and 
oxidiser are combined in a stable solid form, as in a simple firework, and a 
liquid propellant type, where two chemicals, one usually the fuel and the other 
a powerful oxidiser, are mixed together and burned in a combustion chamber. 
125 
THRUST 
Fig 4C Ramjet propulsion 
The BAC Bloodhound missile used two ramjets: the large tubular shapes 
with silvery ends which can be seen above and below the body. The 
smaller tubes are solid-fuel rockets which were used to boost the missile 
to high speed; they were jettisoned once the ramjets had taken over. 
126 MECHANICS OF FLIGHT 
Combustion 
chamber 
No velocity 
of flow 
Throat 
Supply of fuels 
Typical jet 
speed 2000 m/s 
Fig 4.3 Principle of rocket propulsion 
Fig 4D Rocket propulsion 
(By courtesy of Bell Aerospace Division of Textron Inc, USA) 
Flying the two-man Pogo from the rear platform is the rocket belt 
operator; on the front deck is the rocket technician. 
Rocket motors have a very high thrust to weight ratio, and are essentially 
very simple. However they use fuel and oxidiser at a very high rate, and so 
have relatively short duration. The need to carry oxidiser as well as fuel means 
that the total weight of expendable chemicals carried is much higher than in 
engines that use air as the oxidant. Recently, engines have been developed 
which use air as the oxidant at low altitudes and pure rocket propulsion at 
high altitudes or in space. 
Apart from the simple chemically fuelled rockets, several more advanced 
types have been developed. These include ones in which ionised particles or 
plasma is accelerated to very high speeds by electrostatic or electromagnetic 
forces. Some of these have been used on spacecraft, normally as low-thrust 
control jets. 
Engine and propeller propulsion 
Finally, we come to the old and well-tried system of a propeller driven by an 
internal combustion engine (Figs 4.4 and 4E, overleaf). Here there is the clear 
dividing line between the propeller and the engine. We shall consider the pro- 
peller in more detail later in this chapter. There are, of course, some problems 
of airflow even in a reciprocating engine, and we may often use the ram 
effect of a forward-facing intake as an aid to raising the pressure of the 
incoming air, just as we may use the backward exhaust as a partial form of 
jet propulsion. In the cooling system we may even emulate the ramjet by col- 
lecting the air in ducts, using the otherwise wasted heat of the engine to give 
it energy, and ejecting it through a venturi tube -- another little bit of jet 
propulsion. Or, of course, the engine that drives the propeller may itself be a 
gas turbine, and in this case we can allot almost at will the proportion of the 
power that we take from the propeller and from the jet respectively as in the 
turboprop system. 
Thrust and momentum 
All these systems have the common feature that they provide thrust as a result 
of giving momentum to the air, or other gases. In accordance with the princi- 
ples of mechanics the amount of thrust provided will be equal to the rate at 
which momentum is given to the air. 
In symbols, if m kilograms is the mass of air affected per second, and if it 
is given an extra velocity of v metres per second by the propulsion device, then 
the momentum given to the air per second is mv, so 
T mv 
127 
THRUST 
Now clearly the same thrust could be provided by a large m and a small v, or 
by a small m and a large v; in other words, by giving a large mass of air a small 
extra velocity or a small mass of air a large extra velocity. Which will work 
best in practice? 
Let us now work a step further in symbols and figures. To make life easy, 
we will choose to consider the case of a stationary aircraft, perhaps just about 
to start its take-off run. Now the rate at which kinetic energy is given to m kg 
128 MECHANICS OF FLIGHT 
Inflow
Typical increase in 
speed 10 m/s 
Internal combustion 
engine either 
reciprocating or 
gas turbine 
Fig 4.4 Principle of propeller propulsion 
Fig 4E Piston engine and propeller 
The piston engine and propeller is still the most common arrangement for 
light general aviation aircraft. 
of air per second to produce a slipstream or jet speed of v m/s is mv2 watts. 
So while 1 kg/s given 10 m/s has the same rate of momentum change and there- 
fore produces the same thrust as 10 kg/s given 1 m/s, the rate of change of 
energy of the former is 
 1 102 50watts 
and of the latter 
 10 12 5watts 
It is clear therefore that the latter will require less work and that there will be 
less waste of energy; in other words, it will be more efficient than the former 
as a means of producing thrust. 
From this point of view the propeller comes first because it throws back a 
large mass of air at comparatively low velocity, the jet engine comes next, and 
the rocket a bad third in that it throws back a very small mass at a very high 
velocity. 
You may wonder therefore why propellers ever started to go out of fashion. 
The problem is that it is difficult to make them work well at high speed. Since 
the propeller has a rotational as well as a forward speed, it follows that the 
blade tips will start to move through the air faster than the speed of sound long 
before the rest of the aircraft. The occurrence of supersonic flow at the blade 
tips causes all sorts of problems, and although great advances in propeller 
design have been made, jet propulsion provides the only practical alternative 
for high-speed flight. 
High by-pass and turbofan engines 
In order to make a jet engine more efficient, we need to arrange it so that a 
larger mass of air is somehow given a smaller increase in speed. The method 
used is to increase the size of the compressor fan and to allow a proportion of 
the air to pass round the outside of the engine. The momentum given to this 
'by-pass' air contributes to the thrust. There are also a number of secondary 
advantages, the most significant being a reduction in noise. Another function 
of the by-pass air is to help cool the engine and to make use of some of the 
otherwise wasted heat to increase the thrust. 
By increasing the amount of by-pass air, the so-called fan jet (see Fig. 4.5, 
overleaf) was evolved. The fan is not really part of the gas turbine compressor, 
and may sometimes be mounted at the rear of the engine. 
Attempts to increase the efficiency still further lead to even larger fans until 
they become ducted propellers, or eventually unducted advanced turboprops, 
12 
12 
12 
129 
THRUST 
so that after many stages of development we will have come full circle back to 
the propeller! Lower by-pass engines will still however be required for very 
high-speed flight. 
After so much talk of efficiency it is as well to remember that efficiency is 
not everything! We sometimes want value at all costs rather than value for 
money. The thrust given by a jet engine is almost independent of speed, while 
the thrust of a propeller, especially if it is of fixed pitch, falls off badly both 
above and below a certain speed. It is thrust that enables us to fly and gives us 
performance, and sometimes we may be more than willing to pay the price 
provided we get the thrust. 
This seems an appropriate point at which to mention yet another difference 
between jet propulsion and propeller propulsion, one that is related to the fact 
just mentioned that the thrust of a jet is almost independent of speed; so the 
power developed by a jet engine, i.e. thrust speed, varies with the speed and 
there is no satisfactory way of measuring it, either on the ground or in flight; 
when the aircraft is stationary on the ground, and the engine is running, there 
is no forward velocity -- so the power is nil, but the thrust may be consider- 
able, and can be measured. That is why the performance capability of a jet 
engine -- or of a rocket -- is given in terms of thrust and not of power. But when 
an engine drives a propeller, and this applies whether the engine is of the 
turbine or piston type, the thrust, as we have said, is variable, but the power 
produced at the propeller shaft may be considerable even when the aircraft is 
stationary, and what is more it can be measured -- the propeller acts as a brake 
on the engine, and the power is sometimes measured by other kinds of brake, 
and is sometimes called brake power -- so these engines are compared 
according to the power they produce, and not by the thrust which would be 
meaningless. 
130 MECHANICS OF FLIGHT 
Combustion 
chamber 
Compressor 
Turbine 
Fan 
Fig 4.5 A turbofan engine 
The propeller or airscrew 
Of the various systems of propulsion, the propeller has been most used in the 
past, and for many types of aircraft it is likely to be a long time in dying. More 
and more gas turbines, rather than reciprocating engines, are being used for 
driving propellers but that does not in any way affect the aerodynamic prob- 
lems involved. It is right, therefore, that we should give brief consideration to 
those problems. Some of them also are common to those of the helicopter, 
some too to the blades of compressors and fans and turbines, and these are 
further reasons why we should consider them. 
The object of the propeller is to convert the torque, or turning effect, given 
by the power of the engine, into a straightforward pull, or push, called thrust. 
If an airscrew is in front of the engine it will cause tension in the shaft and 
so will pull the aeroplane -- such an airscrew is called a tractor. If, on the other 
hand, it is behind the engine, it will push the aeroplane forward, and it is called 
a pusher (Figs 4F and 4G, later). In Fig. 4H (later) there is an unusual combi- 
nation of both pusher and tractor propellers. 
How it works 
Each part of a propeller blade has a cross-section similar to that of an aero- 
foil; in fact, in some cases exactly the same shape of section has been used for 
both purposes. The thrust of the propeller is obtained because the chord at 
each part of the blade is inclined at a small angle (similar to the angle of attack 
of an aerofoil) to its direction of motion. Since, however, the propeller is both 
rotating and going forward, the direction of the airflow against the blade will 
be at some such angle as is shown in Figs 4.6 (overleaf) and 4.7 (later). This 
will result in lift and drag on the blade section, just as it does on an aerofoil. 
Actually in a propeller we are not so much concerned with the forces perpen- 
dicular and parallel to the airflow, i.e. lift and drag, as the force acting along 
the axis of the aeroplane (the thrust force) and at right angles to the rotation 
(the resistance force). So the total force on the blade must be resolved into 
thrust and resistance forces, as in Fig. 4.7. The difference between these and 
lift and drag is clearly seen by comparing Figs 4.6 and 4.7. 
The total torque force on the propeller blades will cause a turning moment 
or torque which opposes the engine torque, and also tends to rotate the com- 
plete aeroplane in the opposite direction to that in which the propeller is 
revolving. When the propeller is revolving at a steady number of revolutions 
per minute, then the propeller torque and the engine torque will be exactly 
equal and opposite. 
131 
THRUST 
Helix angle and blade angle 
Why is the theory of the propeller more involved than that of the aerofoil? 
Chiefly because the local direction of motion of the blade is along a helix 
rather than a straight line, and, what is more, every section of the propeller 
blade travels on a different helix (Fig. 4.8, overleaf). The angle (f) between the 
resultant direction of the airflow and the plane of rotation (Fig. 4.6) is called 
the angle of advance or helix angle, and it is a different angle at each section 
of the blade. The sections near the tip move on a helix of much greater diam- 
eter, and they also move at a much greater velocity than those near the boss. 
Since all the sections must be set at a small extra angle to give the angle of 
attack, and since for maximum efficiency this extra angle should be approxi- 
mately the same at all parts of the blade, it is clear that the blade angle, or 
pitch angle, must vary like the helix angle from boss to tip. Figure 4.9 (later) 
shows a typical variation of blade angle. 
The blade angle is best defined as the angle which the chord of the propeller 
section at any particular place makes with the horizontal plane when the pro- 
132 MECHANICS OF FLIGHT 
Fig 4F Pusher -- old type (opposite) 
The Bristol Boxkite. One blade of the small pusher propeller can be seen 
protruding behind and below the minimal wooden box fuselage with its 
barrel-shaped fuel tank. 
Direction of motion and 
velocity of aeroplane 
Angle of advance 
or helix angle 
Angle of 
attack 
Lift 
Drag 
Direction of airflow 
against blade 
Direction of motion and velocity of
this section of blade relative to the aeroplane
f 
Total 
force 
Actual direction of motion and velocity 
of section of blade 
Fig 4.6 Motion of a section of propeller blade 
Showing resolution of total force into lift and drag 
133 
THRUST 
peller is laid flat on its boss on this horizontal plane, its axis being vertical (Fig. 
4.10, overleaf). The figure shows how the blade angle is made up of the helix 
angle plus the angle of attack. 
Advance per revolution 
In a propeller, the blade angle at each section is greater than the helix angle 
and, what is more important, the distance moved forward in one revolution 
(called the advance per revolution) is not by any means a fixed quantity, as it 
depends entirely on the forward speed of the aeroplane. 
134 MECHANICS OF FLIGHT 
Fig 4G Pusher -- new type (opposite) 
(By courtesy of the Beech Aircraft Corporation, USA) 
The Beech Starship. Twin pusher turboprop with many other advanced 
features including tail-first 'canard' configuration. 
Resistance 
force 
Direction of airflow 
against blade 
Direction of motion 
of aeroplane 
Total 
force 
Thrust 
Fig 4.7 Motion of a section of a propeller blade 
Showing resolution of total force into thrust and resistance 
A 
B 
C 
Path travelled 
byC 
Helical path of B 
Advance 
per revolution 
Helical path of A 
Fig 4.8 Helical paths travelled by various sections of propeller blade 
135 
THRUST 
136 MECHANICS OF FLIGHT 
Fig 4H Pusher and tractor 
(By courtesy of Cessna Aircraft Company, USA) 
Unique 4/6 seater with two tandem horizontally opposed air-cooled 
engines, each driving a 2-blade feathering constant-speed propeller. 
Blade angle
90° 
60° 
30° 
0°01 
02 
03 
04 
05 
06 
07 
08 
09 
0 
100% 
Percentage of tip radius 
75% 
section 
Most important 
sections 
between these 
points 
Fig 4.9 Variation of blade angle 
Vertical
axis
Blade 
angle 
Horizontal 
plane 
Angle of 
attack a 
Helix 
angle f 
Fig 4.10 Blade angle 
For instance, if an aeroplane is flying at 100 m/s and the propeller is making 
1200 rpm -- i.e. 20 revs per second -- then the advance per revolution will be 
100/20 5 metres. But the same aeroplane may fly at 80 m/s, with the same 
revolutions of the propeller, and the advance per revolution will be only 4 
metres; while when the engine is run up on the ground and there is no forward 
motion, the advance per revolution will obviously be 0. 
Considering first a fixed-pitch propeller, if the angle of a blade section at a 
radius of r metres is q°, and if this particular blade section were to move par- 
allel to its chord -- i.e. so that its angle of attack was 0° -- while at the same 
time it made one complete revolution, then the distance travelled forward, p 
metres, would be a definite quantity and would correspond to the pitch of an 
ordinary screw, the relation p 2pr tan q being true. This is best seen graph- 
ically by setting off the blade angle q from the distance 2pr drawn horizontally, 
p being the vertical height. If the same operation is carried out at different dis- 
tances from the axis of the propeller (Fig. 4.11), it will be found that the value 
of p is practically the same for all sections of the blade since as the radius r 
increases there is a corresponding decrease in the blade angle q, and 2pr tan q 
remains constant. 
Pitch of a propeller 
This quantity, p, is called the geometric pitch, since it depends only on the geo- 
metric dimensions and not on the performance of the propeller. The value of 
the geometric pitch of a fixed-pitch propeller may vary from about 1 metre for 
a slow type of aeroplane to the 5 or 6 metres that was used on Schneider 
Trophy and other racing aircraft (Fig. 4I). 
137 
THRUST 
p
r3 
r4 
r2 
r1 
?2 
?3 
?4 
?1 
r1 
2p 
r2 
2p 
r3 
2p 
r4 
2p 
Fig 4.11 Geometric pitch 
The designer of a propeller may find it convenient to consider the pitch 
from a different viewpoint. When the advance per revolution reaches a certain 
value, the thrust becomes zero, the reason being that the angle of attack of 
each part of the blade has become so small that the aerofoil section of the 
blade provides no thrust. (Notice how this corresponds to the small negative 
angle at which an aerofoil ceases to give lift.) The experimental mean pitch is 
defined as the distance the propeller will move forward in one revolution when 
it is giving no thrust. 
Efficiency 
Now the efficiency of a propeller is the ratio of the useful work given out by 
the propeller to the work put into it by the engine. Mechanical work done is 
measured by the force multiplied by the distance moved, and so when either 
the force or the distance is zero, the useful work done is zero, and the efficiency 
nil. Thus when the propeller moves forward in each revolution a distance 
equal to the experimental pitch, the fact that there is no thrust means that 
there is no efficiency. Also, when there is no forward speed, there is no distance 
moved, no work done and therefore no efficiency. Between these two extremes 
are the normal conditions of flight. 
It might be thought that the object of the propeller is to give the maximum 
thrust (T) with the minimum torque (Q), i.e. to give the maximum T/Q ratio. 
However, Figs 4.6 and 4.7 show that in order to get a high value of T/Q, two 
things are required -- a high value of L/D and the optimum helix angle, which 
is theoretically around 45 degrees. The high value of L/D is fairly easy, and is 
an old problem; what is needed is a good aerofoil section, set at near the 
correct small angle to the relative air flow, and this means twisting the blade, 
as already explained. 
138 MECHANICS OF FLIGHT 
Fig 4I Fixed pitch propeller 
(By courtesy of what was the Fairey Aviation Co Ltd) 
Two-blader with very large pitch angle, as used in the Schneider Trophy 
contest, 1931. 
The provision of the optimum helix angle is more difficult, as this would 
require matching the rotational speed to the forward speed. In practice, this is 
impractical, and the propeller is normally run at near constant speed, as 
described later. In any case, the optimum helix angle can only be obtained at 
one position along the blade, since the blade is twisted. However, the tip of the 
propeller is moving faster than the inboard sections, and thus tends to produce 
a high proportion of the thrust, so it is the angle of the tip that is most 
important. With fixed pitch propellers, a compromise on the pitch angle has 
to be made between high efficiency cruising, and high thrust for take-off. 
Under conditions of maximum efficiency the advance per revolution is 
usually considerably less than the experimental pitch. The experimental pitch 
is sometimes called the ideal pitch, while the advance per revolution is the 
actual practical pitch. The difference between the two is called the slip, and is 
usually expressed as a percentage. 
The calculation of propeller efficiency is quite straightforward. For 
example, if the total drag of an aeroplane at 65 m/s is 4.22 kN and the power 
developed by the engine when the aeroplane is flying at this speed is 336 kW, 
then -- 
Work given to propeller per second 336 000 joules 
Work done by propeller per second 4220 65 
274 300 joules 
So efficiency of the propeller Work got out/Work put in 100 per cent 
(274 300/336 000) 100 per cent 
81.6 per cent 
This represents the approximate value of the efficiency obtainable from a good 
propeller, although in some instances it may rise as high as 85 or even 90 per 
cent. The best efficiency is obtained when the slip is of the order of 30 per cent. 
For those who prefer to examine this question in terms of mathematical 
symbols the efficiency of a propeller can be deduced as follows -- 
Let v forward velocity in m/s 
T thrust of propeller in newtons 
n revolutions per second of engine 
Q torque exerted by engine in N-m 
139 
THRUST 
Work done by thrust T at v metres per second Tv joules per second, or 
watts 
Work given by engine 2pQ joules per rev 
2pnQ joules per second, or watts 
Efficiency of propeller (Tv/2pnQ) 100 per cent 
Tip speed 
The power developed by a piston engine depends upon the pressures attained 
during combustion in the cylinders and on the revolutions per minute. The 
greatest power in most engines is developed at a fairly high number of revolu- 
tions per minute; and if the propeller rotates at the same speed as the engine 
crankshaft, the tip speed of the propeller blades is liable to approach or exceed 
the speed of sound (about 340 m/s in air at ground level, and less at higher alti- 
tudes). This causes compressibility effects (see Chapter 11), which, in turn, 
mean an increase in torque and decrease in thrust; in other words, a loss of 
efficiency. It is clearly of little purpose to design an engine to give high power, 
if at such power the propeller is to become less efficient and so transfer a lower 
proportion of the engine power to the aircraft. In the early stages of compress- 
ibility some improvement can be effected by changing the blade section near 
the tip to a thin laminar-flow type and by washing out the blade angle slightly; 
if this is done the loss is not serious so long as the actual speed of the tip does 
not exceed the speed of sound. As a further help a reduction gear is often intro- 
duced between the engine crankshaft and the propeller; the reduction is not 
usually very large, perhaps 0.7 or 0.8 to 1, but is just sufficient to reduce the 
tip speed to a reasonable margin below the speed of sound. 
The tip speed, of course, depends not only on the revolutions per minute, 
but also on the forward speed of the aeroplane and the diameter of the pro- 
peller. The high forward speed of modern aeroplanes is such that it is 
becoming very difficult to keep the tip speed down below the speed of sound, 
and it would seem that at forward speeds of 350 knots or more some loss in 
efficiency must be accepted. At 430 knots the loss in efficiency is serious and 
has spread to a larger proportion of the propeller blades so that it affects not 
only the tips but what should be the most efficient sections. At this stage there 
is nothing for it but for the propeller to retire gracefully and hand over 
supremacy to jet propulsion. 
A further objection to high tip speed is that the noise caused by the pro- 
peller (incidentally a large proportion of the total noise) is much intensified, 
especially in the plane in which the propeller is rotating. This can be annoying 
140 MECHANICS OF FLIGHT 
both outside and inside the aircraft, and in severe cases, structural damage can 
result. 
Variable pitch 
For low-speed aeroplanes the thrust of a fixed-pitch propeller is usually found 
to be greatest when there is no forward speed, i.e. when the aeroplane is sta- 
tionary on the ground. The thrust developed under these conditions is called 
the static thrust, and its large value is very useful since it serves to give the 
aeroplane a good acceleration when starting from rest and thus reduces the 
run required for taking off. But in high-speed aircraft a fixed-pitch propeller 
designed for maximum speed would have such a large pitch, and, therefore, 
such steep pitch angles, that some portions of the blades would strike the air 
at angles of as much as 70° or more when there is no forward speed, the 
efficiency and static thrust would be very poor, and great difficulty would be 
experienced in taking off. The only remedy is variable pitch. 
This requirement led to the development of the so-called constant-speed 
propeller (Fig. 4J) in which the pitch is automatically adjusted so that the pro- 
peller revolves at a given rate decided by the pilot, and remains at that rate 
irrespective of throttle opening or manoeuvres of the aeroplane. Thus engine 
and propeller can work at high efficiency irrespective of conditions, such as 
take-off, climb, maximum speed, altitude, and so on. 
141 
THRUST 
Fig 4J Constant-speed propeller 
A classic constant-speed propeller design. The hydraulically-actuated speed 
control unit is housed in the small domed unit on the front of the hub. 
It has already been stated that there are problems common to propeller and 
helicopter blades, and one of these is that of variable pitch, which in helicop- 
ters is a virtual necessity as a means of control. 
An extension of the idea of variable pitch leads to a propeller with the pitch 
variable not only over the range of blade angles that will be required for 
normal conditions of flight but beyond these angles in both directions. 
If the blade can be turned beyond the normal fully-coarse position until the 
chord lies along the direction of flight, thus offering the minimum resistance, 
the propeller is said to be feathered. This condition is very useful on a multi- 
engined aircraft for reducing the drag of the propeller on an engine that is out 
of action. It has another advantage too in that it is a convenient method of 
stopping the propeller and so preventing it from 'windmilling'; this reduces the 
risk of further damage to an engine that is already damaged. 
The turning of the blade beyond the fully-fine position makes the propeller 
into an effective air brake; it has exactly the opposite effect to feathering by 
causing the maximum drag, which occurs when the blade angle is approxi- 
mately 2° or 3°. 
If the blade angle is still further reduced, i.e. to negative angles, then instead 
of allowing the blades to windmill, we can run the engine and produce negative 
thrust or drag. This produces an excellent brake for use in slowing up the aero- 
plane after landing since it gives a high negative thrust at low forward speeds. 
Number and shape of blades 
The propeller must be able to absorb the power given to it by the engine; that 
is to say, it must have a resisting torque to balance the engine torque, other- 
wise it will race, and both propeller and engine will become inefficient. 
The climbing conditions are particularly difficult to satisfy since high power 
is being used at low forward speeds; and if we do satisfy these conditions -- by 
any of the methods suggested below -- it will be difficult to get efficiency in 
high-speed flight. Thus, the propeller becomes a compromise like so many 
things in an aeroplane. 
The ability of the propeller to absorb power may be increased by -- 
1. Increasing the blade angle and thus the angle of attack of the blades. 
2. Increasing the length of the blades, and thus the diameter of the propeller. 
3. Increasing the revolutions per minute of the propeller. 
4. Increasing the camber of the aerofoil section of which the blade is made. 
5. Increasing the chord (or width) of the blades. 
6. Increasing the number of blades. 
142 MECHANICS OF FLIGHT 
With so many possibilities one might think that this was an easy problem to 
solve, but in reality it is one that has caused considerable difficulty. First, the 
blade angle should be such that the angle of attack is that giving maximum 
efficiency; there is, therefore, little point in trying to absorb more power if, in 
so doing, we lose efficiency. The second possibility is to increase the diameter, 
in other words, to increase the blade aspect ratio, but quite apart from the 
bogey of tip speed, with large propellers there is the problem of providing 
enough ground clearance. The third would mean high tip speed and conse- 
quent loss of efficiency. The fourth, as with aerofoils, would simply mean a less 
efficient section; it would seem, too, that we must face even thinner aerofoil 
sections to avoid loss of efficiency at high speed. So we are left with the last 
two, and fortunately they provide some hope. Either will result in an increase 
in what is called the solidity of the propeller. This really means the ratio 
between that part of the propeller disc which, when viewed from the front, is 
solid and the part which is just air. The greater the solidity, the greater the 
power that can be absorbed. 
Of the two methods of increasing solidity, increase of chord and increase of 
number of blades, the former is the easier, the latter the more efficient. The so- 
called paddle blades are examples of the former method. But there is a limit to 
this, first, because the poor aspect ratio makes the blades less efficient. 
So, all in all, an increase in the number of blades is the most attractive prop- 
osition, and that is why we saw, first, the two-blader (yes, there has been a 
one-blader! -- but only one); then, in turn, three, four, five, and six blades; and 
we might have gone to eight- and ten-bladers had not jet propulsion come 
along at the critical time. 
After four or, at the most, five blades, it becomes inconvenient to fit all the 
blades into one hub, and it is, in effect, necessary to have two propellers for 
each engine. If we are going to have two propellers, we may as well rotate 
them in opposite directions (Fig. 4K, overleaf) and so gain other advantages 
which will become more apparent when we have considered the effects of the 
propeller on the aeroplane. 
The slipstream 
The propeller produces thrust by forcing the air backwards, and the resultant 
stream of air which flows over the fuselage, tail units, and other parts of the 
aeroplane is called the slipstream. 
The extent of the slipstream may be taken roughly as being that of a 
cylinder of the same diameter as the propeller. Actually there is a slight con- 
traction of the diameter a short distance behind the propeller. 
The velocity of the slipstream is greater than that at which the aeroplane is 
travelling through the air; the increase in velocity may be as much as 100 per 
cent, or even more, at the stalling speed of the aeroplane. This means that the 
143 
THRUST 
velocity of the air flowing over all those parts in the slipstream is twice that of 
the airflow over the other parts, and so the drag is four times as great as cor- 
responding parts outside the slipstream. At higher forward speeds the 
difference is not as great, being only about 50 per cent at normal speeds, and 
as little as 10 per cent at high speeds. The extra velocity of the slipstream may 
be beneficial in providing more effective control for rudder and elevators, 
especially when the aeroplane is travelling slowly through the air, e.g. when 
taxying, or taking off, or flying near the stalling speed. With jet propulsion, 
however, it is not advisable for the hot jet to strike the tail plane which, in con- 
sequence, is often set very high (Fig. 5F). 
In addition to increased velocity, the propeller imparts a rotary motion to 
the slipstream in the same direction as its own rotation; so it will strike one 
side only of such surfaces as the fin, and so may have considerable effects on 
the directional and lateral balance of the aeroplane. If these effects are com- 
pensated for in normal flight -- e.g. by offsetting the fin so that it does not lie 
directly fore and aft -- then the balance will be upset when the engine stops and 
the slipstream ceases to exert its influence. 
144 MECHANICS OF FLIGHT 
Fig 4K Contra-rotating propellers 
Four sets of these six-bladed contra-rotating propellers were employed to 
propel the old Shackleton patrol aircraft. The noise inside the fuselage, 
which had no padding or sound absorption material, made the long 
duration flights decidedly arduous for the crew. 
Gyroscopic effect 
The rotating mass of the propeller or the compressor in the case of a jet engine 
may cause a slight gyroscopic effect. A rotating body tends to resist any change 
in its plane of rotation, and if such change does take place there is superim- 
posed a tendency for the plane of rotation to change also in a direction at right 
angles to that in which it is forced. This can easily be illustrated with an ordi- 
nary bicycle wheel; if the wheel, while rapidly rotating, is held on a horizontal 
shaft and the holder attempts to keep the shaft horizontal while he turns, the 
shaft will either tilt upwards or downwards according to whether he turns 
with the opposite or the same sense of rotation as that of the wheel. Thus if 
the propeller rotates clockwise when viewed from the pilot's cockpit (the usual 
method of denoting the rotation), the nose will tend to drop on a right-hand 
turn and the tail to drop on a left-hand turn. It is only in exceptional cases that 
this effect is really appreciable, although it used to be very marked in the days 
of rotary engines when the rotating mass was considerable. 
Swing on take-off 
There is often a tendency for an aeroplane to swing to one side during the 
take-off run. This must be due to some asymmetric feature of the aircraft, and 
it is an interesting problem to try to track down the real villain that is causing 
the swing. 
The pilot should be the first suspect. He himself is not symmetrical, he may 
be right-handed (or left-handed), he probably looks out on one side of the 
aeroplane and may even sit on one side. Certain it is that some aircraft which 
have swung violently when the pilot has tried to keep them straight have gone 
as straight as a die when left to themselves! 
The second and main suspect is undoubtedly the propeller. But which of its 
asymmetric effects is the chief cause of swing in any particular aircraft is not 
so easy to determine. If the propeller rotates clockwise, the torque reaction 
will be anti-clockwise, the left-hand wheel will be pressed on the ground and 
the extra friction should tend to yaw the aircraft to the left. But let us not 
forget that the torque reaction may be compensated and, in that case, the 
behaviour of the aeroplane will depend on how it is compensated. 
The slipstream -- assuming the same clockwise propeller -- will itself rotate 
clockwise and will probably strike the fin and rudder on the left-hand side, 
again tending to yaw the aircraft to the left. But the slipstream too may be 
compensated. 
The gyroscopic effect will only come in when the tail is being raised. Again 
the tendency will be to swing to the left if the propeller rotates clockwise. Try 
it with the bicycle wheel. 
145 
THRUST 
Apart from the compensating devices already mentioned the tendency to 
swing can be largely, if not entirely, eliminated by opposite rotating propellers 
on multi-engined aircraft (Fig. 4K), by contra-rotating propellers on single- 
engined aircraft and by jet propulsion or rocket propulsion instead of 
propellers. 
Contra-rotating propellers not only give the greater blade area, or solidity, 
that is required to absorb large power, but they eliminate or very nearly elimi- 
nate all the asymmetrical effects of slipstream, propeller torque, and gyroscopic 
action. It is curious that the average pilot hardly realised the existence of these 
asymmetrical effects -- until he lost them. Pilots who flew behind contra- 
rotating propellers for the first time reported that the aircraft was easy to 
handle and nice to fly. This is hardly surprising; what perhaps is surprising is 
that the previous ill-effects of one-way rotation had been so little noticed. The 
second propeller straightens the slipstream created by the first and so causes a 
straight high-speed flow of air over wings and tail; this improves the control 
and there is little or no resultant torque tending to roll the aircraft in one direc- 
tion, and therefore no need to counteract such tendency; the gyroscopic effects 
are also neutralised. All this means that there should be no tendency to swing 
to one side during take-off, no roll or yaw if the throttle is suddenly opened or 
closed, no difference in aileron or rudder trim, whether the engine is on or off 
-- in short, the aircraft should be easy to handle and nice to fly. 
Can you answer these? 
Some simple questions about thrust and propellers -- 
1. What is a ramjet? 
2. What is meant by the blade angle of a propeller, and why does this angle 
decrease from boss to tip? 
3. Distinguish between the 'advance per revolution', the 'geometric pitch' 
and the 'experimental pitch' of a propeller. 
4. What is slip? 
5. What are the advantages of a variable-pitch propeller? 
6. Why is the tip speed an important factor in propeller design? 
7. Why is solidity important, and how can it be increased? 
8. What methods of propulsion can be used outside the earth's atmosphere? 
For solutions see Appendix 5. 
Turn to Appendix 3 for a few simple numerical examples on thrust. 
146 MECHANICS OF FLIGHT 
Introduction 
The flight of an aeroplane may be considered as consisting of various stages. 
First, the take-off, during which the aircraft is transferred from one medium 
to another; then the climb, during which the pilot gains the height at which the 
level part of the flight will be made; then a period of this steady flight at a con- 
stant height, interrupted in certain cases by periods of manoeuvres, or 
aerobatics; the approach back towards the earth; and finally the landing. 
On long distance flights the main portion may consist of a long slow 
steady climb, which is more economical than maintaining the same height 
as fuel is consumed, and the weight of the aircraft is reduced, and so it is 
often only during a small portion of each flight that the aeroplane may be 
considered as travelling in straight and level flight at uniform velocity (Fig. 
5A, overleaf). 
The four forces 
Now, what are the forces which keep the aeroplane in its state of steady level 
flight? First the lift, which will be vertically upwards since the direction of 
motion is horizontal. This we have created with the express object of keeping 
the aeroplane in the air by opposing the force of gravity, namely, the weight. 
But we can only produce lift if the aeroplane is moved forward and for this we 
need the thrust provided by the propeller or jets. We also know that the 
forward motion will be opposed by the drag. 
The aeroplane, therefore, can be said to be under the influence of four main 
forces -- 
1. The Lift, L, acting vertically upwards through the Centre of Pressure. 
Level flight 
CHAPTER5 
2. The Weight of the aeroplane, W, acting vertically downwards through the 
Centre of Gravity. 
3. The Thrust of the engine, T, pulling horizontally forwards. 
4. The Drag, D, acting horizontally backwards. 
Just as for certain purposes it is convenient to consider all the weight as acting 
through one point, called the centre of gravity, or all the lift as acting at the 
centre of pressure, so we may imagine the resultant of all the drag acting at 
one point which, for convenience, we will call the centre of drag. Its actual 
position depends on the relative resistance of different parts of the aeroplane. 
Conditions of equilibrium 
Now, under what conditions will these four forces balance the aeroplane? 
That is to say, keep it travelling at a steady height at uniform velocity in a fixed 
direction, a state of affairs which, in the language of mechanics, is known as 
equilibrium. It is sometimes hard to convince a traveller by air that he may 
travel at 200 m/s and yet be in a state of equilibrium; equilibrium simply 
means that the existing state of affairs is remaining unchanged; in other words, 
that the aeroplane is obeying Newton's First Law of Motion. 
In order to do this the forces acting on it must be balanced -- the lift must 
be equal to the weight (this condition will keep the aeroplane at a constant 
height); and the thrust must be equal to the drag (this condition will keep the 
aeroplane moving at the same steady velocity). 
The idea is often prevalent that the lift must be greater than the weight, or, 
as it is often expressed, the lift must 'overcome' the weight; and when it comes 
148 MECHANICS OF FLIGHT 
Fig 5A Long haul, large capacity 
This Boeing 747--400 'Jumbo' has 350 seats, and a range of 13 528 km 
that could take it from Europe to Australia non-stop. 
to the question of thrust and drag the author has known students dismiss the 
idea that the thrust need only be equal to the drag as 'contrary to common 
sense'. 
There still remains a third condition for equilibrium. In order to maintain 
straight and even flight, we must prevent the aeroplane from rotating, and this 
depends not only on the magnitudes of the four forces, but also on the pos- 
itions at which they act. If the centre of pressure is behind the centre of gravity, 
the nose will tend to drop and the tail to rise, and vice versa if the centre of 
pressure is in front of the centre of gravity. But we are also concerned with the 
lines of action of the thrust and drag, for if the line of thrust is high and the 
line of drag is low, these two forces also will tend to make the nose drop. Such 
tendencies could be prevented by the pilot using his controls, but it is the aim 
of the designer to make an aeroplane which will in the words of the pilot, fly 
'hands off'. Therefore he must see that the forces act in the right places. 
Difficulties in balancing the four forces 
First, the lift. The lift will act through the centre of pressure, which will depend 
on the position of the wings; so the designer must be careful to place the planes 
in the correct position along the fuselage. But the problem is complicated by 
the fact that a change in the angle of attack means a movement of the lift, and 
usually in the unstable direction; if the angle of attack is increased the pitching 
moment about the centre of gravity will become more nose-up, and tend to 
increase the angle even further. 
Secondly, the weight. This will act through the centre of gravity, which in 
turn will depend on the weight and position of every individual part of the 
aeroplane and the loads that it carries. Here alone is sufficient problem, but 
again there is a possibility of movement of the centre of gravity during flight 
caused, for instance, by consumption of fuel, dropping of bombs or movement 
of passengers. In the Concorde, fuel was actually moved from one tank to 
another to adjust the position of the centre of gravity. 
Thirdly, the thrust. Here the problem is easier. The line of thrust is settled 
by the position of the propeller shaft or centre line of the jet, which in turn 
depend on the position of the engine or engines. In this matter the designer has 
little choice, but has to consider such problems as keeping the propeller clear 
of the ground and giving the pilot a clear view ahead; new problems arise too 
when the thrust can be deflected as in certain modern types. 
Lastly, the drag. This is, perhaps, the most difficult of all. The total drag is 
composed of the drag of all the separate parts, and the designer must either 
estimate the drag of each part separately, and so find the total drag and its line 
of action, or must rely on wind tunnel experiments on a model or computed 
predictions; and even when the line of drag has been found it too will be liable 
to change at different angles of attack. 
149 
LEVEL FLIGHT 
Arranging the forces 
For steady flight along a straight line, whether level or not, it is not only 
necessary to balance the four forces so that they produce no resultant force; 
their lines of action must also be arranged so that they produce no resultant 
moment, otherwise the aircraft will rotate either nose-up or nose-down. When 
there is no resultant moment, the aircraft is said to be trimmed. Mathematically, 
if the sum of the moments is M, then the condition for trim is that M 0. 
One way to achieve this would be to arrange that all of the forces act 
through a single point, as in Fig. 5.1. However this is not generally practical, 
as there are many factors that tend to alter the line of action, apart from those 
already stated. For example, lowering the undercarriage tends to shift the line 
of the resultant drag down, and on the floatplane variant of a light aircraft 
illustrated in Fig. 5B the position of the drag resultant would be very much 
lower than for the original floatless design. 
It is possible to balance the moment produced by the drag and thrust being 
out of line, by arranging the lift and weight forces to be out of line by an 
amount that causes them to exactly produce the necessary balancing moment, 
as in Fig 5.2. However, because of the way that the lines of action of the forces 
tend to change according to aircraft attitude, fuel weight etc., there is no 
simple design solution to ensure that the resultant moment will always be zero. 
As described below, some active involvement of the pilot is required in order 
to keep the aircraft trimmed. 
The tail plane and other horizontal control surfaces 
The traditional method of ensuring that the aircraft can be trimmed to give no 
resultant moment is to provide the aircraft with an auxiliary lifting surface 
150 MECHANICS OF FLIGHT 
L 
T 
W 
D 
Fig 5.1 Forces acting through a single point. This arrangement is not 
generally practical, as the line of action of the lift tends to move around 
with the angle of attack 
called a tail plane. The lift of the tail plane can be regulated by the pilot, and 
thus he can adjust the moment that it applies. Fig. 5.3 (overleaf) shows how this 
works. The tail plane can produce lift in either the positive (upward) or nega- 
tive (downward sense) in order to produce the required moment for trim. To 
change the tail plane lift, either the whole surface can be pivoted, or the rear 
part of the surface (the elevator) can be hinged up or down. In practice, for 
small adjustments to the trim, it is common practice to provide a very small 
hinged surface or 'trim tab' in addition to the main elevator, as described later. 
151 
LEVEL FLIGHT 
L 
T 
W 
D 
Fig 5.2 Moment due to lift and weight balanced by moment due to drag 
and thrust 
Fig 5B Floatplane 
(By courtesy of Cessna Aircraft Company, USA) 
Nowadays, there are many types of horizontal control surface, and sometimes 
even the engine exhaust direction can be altered to provide a trim control. 
'Tail-less' and 'tail-first' aeroplanes 
The reader will probably have realised by now that the existence of this aux- 
iliary plane -- the stabiliser, as the Americans rather aptly call it -- is a necessity 
rather than a luxury, because even if the four main forces can be balanced for 
one particular condition of flight, they are not likely to remain so for long. 
What then of the so-called tail-less type of aeroplane? 
This type has had followers from the very early days of flying -- and among 
birds from prehistoric times -- and although the reasons for its adoption have 
changed somewhat, a common feature has been a large degree of sweepback, 
or even delta-shaped wings, so that although this type may appear to have no 
tail, the exact equivalent is found at its wing tips, the wings being, in fact, 
swept back so that the tip portion can fulfil the functions of the tail plane in 
the orthodox aeroplane. In fact, it is true to say that the 'tail-less' type has two 
tails instead of one! (Figs 5C and 5D). 
More unusual is the tail-first or canard configuration aeroplane. A most 
important historical example was the original Wright Flyer, which is generally 
accepted to have made the first controlled power-driven flight. Like many early 
ideas, the canard has recently made something of a come-back (Fig. 5E, over- 
leaf), and examples are now found for many types of aircraft, but particularly 
for missiles and highly manoeuvrable fighters such as the Eurofighter 
Typhoon. A tail in front can hardly be called a tail, and this surface is com- 
monly known now as the foreplane. 
152 MECHANICS OF FLIGHT 
T 
W 
D 
L(wing) 
L (tail) 
Fig 5.3 The pilot can adjust the tail lift so that the resultant moment is 
zero and the aircraft is trimmed. The tail lift can be either upwards or 
downwards 
153 
LEVEL FLIGHT 
Fig 5C Tail-less -- old type 
(By courtesy of Flight) 
The Westland Hill Pterodactyl. 
Fig 5D Tail-less -- new type 
This popular form of powered microlight aircraft has been derived from 
hang-glider technology. 
Loads on tail plane 
But to return to the normal aeroplane. Where the four main forces can be sat- 
isfactorily balanced in themselves, the duty of the tail plane is merely to act as 
a 'stand-by'. Therefore, it will usually be set at such an angle, that at cruise 
speed it will be at zero angle of attack, thereby producing no lift. At flight 
speeds higher than the cruise speed, the lift coefficient must be lowered to com- 
pensate for the higher dynamic pressure otherwise the lift would be greater 
than the weight. This means that the aircraft must be trimmed a little more 
nose-down. In doing so, the centre of lift of the wing will move back, giving a 
nose-down pitching moment. However, if the angle of attack of the tail plane 
was zero for cruise, then it will now become negative, and the tail will gen- 
erate a down-force (Fig. 5.4) producing a nose-up pitching moment which will 
tend to more than counteract the nose-down moment produced by the wing. 
In fact, as the flight speed increases, the pilot normally has to make a small 
nose-down trim adjustment. Correspondingly, at low speeds, the nose of the 
aircraft must be raised in order to increase the angle of attack. This means that 
the tail lift will now become positive (Fig.5.5). As the tail plane is equally likely 
to carry an upward or a downward force, it is usually of symmetrical camber, 
and therefore produces no lift at zero angle of attack. On a tail-first or canard 
aircraft, the foreplane is set at a slightly higher angle of attack than the wings 
for reasons of stability, and both wings produce lift in normal flight. 
154 MECHANICS OF FLIGHT 
Fig 5E Tail-first 
Apart from the canard layout, the Rutan Vari-Eze shows many unusual 
features such as a pusher propeller, composite construction, and a 
nosewheel that can be retracted in flight or when parked. 
Effects of downwash 
In many types of aircraft the air which strikes the tail plane has already passed 
over the main planes, and the trailing vortices from these will cause a down- 
wash on to the tail plane (Fig. 5.6, overleaf). The angle of this downwash may 
be at least half the angle of attack on the main planes, so that if the main 
planes strike the airflow at 4°, the air which strikes the tail plane will be 
descending at an angle of 2°, so that if the tail plane were given a riggers' angle 
of incidence of 2°, it would strike the airflow head-on and, if symmetrical, 
would provide no force upwards or downwards. Again, the angle of down- 
wash will, of course, change with the angle of attack of the main planes, and 
it is for this reason that the angle at which the tail plane should be set is one 
of the difficult problems confronting the designer. 
As we shall discover later, its setting also affects the stability of the aero- 
plane, and further difficulties arise from the fact that in a propeller-driven 
aircraft the tail plane is usually in the slipstream, which is a rotating mass of 
air and will therefore strike the two sides of the tail plane at different angles. 
155 
LEVEL FLIGHT 
W 
L(wing) 
L (tail) 
Fig 5.4 High speed: down load from tail needed to balance effect of 
rearward location of wing lift 
W 
L(wing) 
L (tail) 
Fig 5.5 Low speed: up load from tail needed to balance effect of 
forward location of wing lift 
In jet-driven aircraft the tail plane is often set very high (Fig. 5F), to keep it 
clear of the hot jets, and this in turn may cause trouble since it may be shielded 
by the main planes at large angles of attack, resulting in what is called a deep 
stall and general instability, hence the low tail position illustrated in Fig. 5G. 
Methods of varying the tail plane lift 
For many years, the most common method of altering the tail plane lift was to 
provide a hinged rear portion called an elevator. Moving this up or down alters 
the camber of the surface, and thus changes the lift. However, in supersonic flight, 
changes of camber do not produce much of a change in lift, and it is better to move 
the whole tail surface as a single slab. A slab type tail surface may be seen in 
Figures 5G and 5H (overleaf). The moving slab tailplane is nowadays sometimes 
used even on low-speed aircraft as there are structural and manufacturing advan- 
tages to this type of tail. On some aircraft, particularly large transports, the two 
approaches may be combined. The whole tailplane can be moved, mainly to 
provide for trimming, and a hinged elevator is also used, mainly for control and 
manoeuvre. 
Conditions of balance considered numerically 
We have so far avoided any numerical consideration of the forces which 
balance the aeroplane in straight and level flight; in simple cases, however, 
these present no difficulty. 
When there is no load on the tail plane the conditions of balance are these -- 
1. Lift Weight, i.e. L W. 
2. Thrust Drag, i.e. T D. 
3. The 'nose-down' pitching moment of L and W must balance the 'tail- 
down' pitching moment of T and D. 
156 MECHANICS OF FLIGHT 
Main plane. 
Riggers' angle of incidence 4° 
Angle of attack 4° 
Tail plane. 
Riggers' angle of incidence 2° 
Angle of attack 0° 
Downwash 
Fig 5.6 Effect of downwash on the tail plane 
157 
LEVEL FLIGHT 
Fig 5F High tail 
The tail of a Lockheed C-5 Galaxy. The elevators are split into a number of 
sections to provide redundancy for reasons of safety. 
Fig 5G Low tail 
The Alpha-Jet has a relatively low tail plane with pronounced anhedral. 
158 MECHANICS OF FLIGHT 
The two forces, L and W, are two equal and opposite parallel forces, i.e. a 
couple; their moment is measured by 'one of the forces multiplied by the per- 
pendicular distance between them'. So, if the distance between L and W is x 
metres, the moment is Lx or Wx newton-metres. 
Similarly, T and D form a couple and, if the distance between them is y 
metres, their moment is Ty or Dy newton-metres. 
Therefore the third condition is that -- 
Lx(orWx) Ty(orDy) 
To take a numerical example: Suppose the mass of an aeroplane is 2000 kg. 
Theweightwillberoughly20000N.L W.SoL 20000N. 
Now, what will be the value of the thrust and drag? The reader must 
beware of falling into the ridiculous idea, which is so common among stu- 
dents, that the thrust will be equal to the weight! The statement is sometimes 
made that the 'Four forces acting on the aeroplane are equal', but nothing 
could be farther from the truth. L W and T D, but these equations cer- 
tainly do not make T W. This point is emphasised for the simple reason that 
out of over a thousand students to whom the author has put the question, 
'How do the think the thrust required to pull the aeroplane along in normal 
flight compares with the weight?' more than 50 per cent have suggested that 
the thrust must obviously equal the weight and over half the remainder have 
insisted that, on the other hand, the thrust must be many times greater than 
the weight! Such answers show that the student has not really grasped the fun- 
damental principles of flight, for is not our object to obtain the maximum of 
lift with the minimum of drag, or, what amounts to much the same thing, to 
lift as much weight as possible with the least possible engine power? Have we 
not seen that the wings can produce, at their most efficient angle, a lift of 20, 
25 or even more times as great as their drag? 
It is true that there is a great deal of difference between an aeroplane and a 
wing; for whereas a wing provides us with a large amount of lift and a very 
much smaller amount of drag, all the other parts help to increase the drag and 
provide no lift in return. Actually it is not quite true to say that the wings 
provide all the lift, for by clever design even such parts as the fuselage may be 
persuaded to help. Efforts to increase the lift may be well worth while, but 
even total increase of lift from such sources will be small, whereas the addition 
of the parasite drag of fuselage, tail and undercarriage will form a large item; 
in old designs it might be as much, or even more than the drag of the wings, 
but in modern aircraft with 'clean' lines the proportion of parasite drag has 
159 
LEVEL FLIGHT 
Fig 5H Slab tail planes (opposite) 
(By courtesy of the Grumman Corporation) 
Large slab tail planes and twin fins are evident on this photograph of the 
F--14. 
been much reduced. None the less it may result in the reduction of the lift/drag 
ratio of the aeroplane, as distinct from the aerofoil, down to say 10, 12 or 15. 
So it will be obvious that the ideal aeroplane must be one in which there is 
no parasite drag, i.e. in the nature of a 'flying wing'; we should then obtain a 
lift some forty times the drag. At present we are a long way off this ideal 
except for high-performance gliders. 
In our numerical example, let us assume that the lift is ten times the total 
drag, this being a reasonable figure for an average aeroplane. Then the drag 
will be 2000 N; so thrust will also be 2000 N. This means that an aeroplane 
of weight 20 000 N can be lifted by a thrust of 2000 N; but the lift is not 
direct, the work is all being done in a forward direction -- not upwards. The 
aeroplane is in no sense a helicopter in which the thrust is vertical, and in 
which the thrust must indeed be at least equal to the weight. 
To return to the problem -- 
L W 20000N 
T D 2000 N (This is merely an approximation for a good type of 
aeroplane) 
Lx Ty 
So20000x 2000y 
andx y 
So if T and D are 1 metre apart, L and W must be 1/10 metre apart, i.e. 100 
mm. In other words, the lines of thrust and drag must be farther apart than 
the lines of lift and weight in the same proportion as the lift is greater than the 
drag (Fig. 5.7). 
1 
10 
160 MECHANICS OF FLIGHT 
L=20000N 
D=2000N 
W=20000N 
T=2000N 
x metres 
y metres 
Fig 5.7 Balance of forces -- no load on tail 
Finding the tail load 
This conclusion only applies when there is no force on the tail plane. When 
there is such a force the problem is slightly more complicated, but can still be 
solved by the principle of moments. Consider a further example -- 
An aeroplane weighs 10 000 N; the drag in normal horizontal flight is 
1250 N; the centre of pressure is 25 mm (0.025 m) behind the centre of gravity, 
and the line of drag is 150 mm (0.15 m) above the line of thrust. Find what 
load on the tail plane, which is 6 m behind the centre of gravity, will be 
required to maintain balance in normal horizontal flight. 
Let the lift force on the main planes Y newtons 
Let the force on the tail plane P newtons (assumed upwards) 
Thentotallift L Y P 
(Fig 5.8) 
ButL W 10000N 
 Y P 10000N 
(1) 
AlsoT D 1250N 
(2) 
Take moments about any convenient point; in this case perhaps the most suit- 
able point is 0, the intersection of the weight and thrust lines. 
Nose-down moments about 0 are caused by Y and P 
W and T will, of course, have no moments about 0, 
161 
LEVEL FLIGHT 
T=1250N 
P 
W=10000N 
Y 
D=1250N 
25 mm 
150 mm 
6m 
Fig 5.8 The four forces and the tail load 
So total nose-down moments 0.025 Y 6 P 
(all distances being expressed in metres) 
Tail-down moment about 0 is caused by D only, 
So total tail-down moment 0.15 D 
 0.025Y 6P 0.15D 
i.e.Y 240P 6D 
(3) 
Butfrom(1),Y P 10000 
 239P 6D 10000 
But from (2), D 1250 
 239P 6 1250 10000 
 7500 10000 
  2500 
P   (2500/239)   10.4 N 
Therefore a small downward force of 10.4 N is required on the tail plane, the 
negative sign in the answer simply indicating that the force which we assumed 
to be upwards should have been downwards. 
The student is advised to work out similar examples which will be found in 
Appendix 3 at the end of the book. 
Level flight at different air speeds 
So far we may seem to have assumed that there is only one condition of level 
flight; but this is not so. Level flight is possible over the whole speed range of 
the aeroplane, from the maximum air speed that can be attained down to the 
minimum air speed at which the aeroplane can be kept in the air, both without 
losing height. This speed range is often very wide on modern aircraft; the 
maximum speed may be in the region of 1000 knots or even more, and the 
minimum speed (with flaps lowered) less than 150 knots. Mind you, though 
level flight is possible at any speed within this range, it may be very inadvis- 
able to fly unduly fast when considerations of fuel economy are involved, or 
162 MECHANICS OF FLIGHT 
to fly unduly slowly if an enemy is on your tail! There is nearly always a 
correct speed to fly according to the circumstances. 
Relation between air speed and angle of attack 
An aeroplane flying in level flight at different air speeds will be flying at dif- 
ferent angles of attack, i.e. at different attitudes to the air. Since the flight is 
level, this means different attitudes to the ground, and so the pilot will be able 
to notice these attitudes by reference to the horizon (or to the 'artificial 
horizon' on his instrument panel). 
For every air speed -- as indicated on the air speed indicator -- there is a cor- 
responding angle of attack at which level flight can be maintained (provided 
the weight of the aeroplane does not change). 
Let us examine this important relationship more closely. It all depends on 
our old friend the lift formula, L CL . rV2 . S . To maintain level flight, the 
lift must be equal to the weight. Assuming for the moment that the weight 
remains constant, then the lift must also remain constant and equal to the 
weight. The wing area, S, is unalterable. Now, if we look back, or think back, 
to Chapter 2 we will realise that rV2 represents the difference between the 
pressure on the pitot tube and on the static tube (or static vent), and that this 
difference represents what is read as air speed on the air speed indicator; in 
other words, the indicated air speed. There is only one other item in the 
formula, i.e. CL (the lift coefficient). Therefore if rV2, or the indicated air 
speed, goes up, CL must be reduced, or the lift will become greater than the 
weight. Similarly, if rV2 goes down, CL must go up or the lift will become less 
than the weight. Now CL depends on the angle of attack of the wings; the 
greater the angle of attack (up to the stalling angle), the greater the value of 
CL. Therefore for every angle of attack there is a corresponding indicated air 
speed. 
This is most fortunate, since the pilot will not always have an instrument on 
which he can read the angle of attack, whereas the air speed indicator gives 
him an easy reading of air speed. That is why a pilot always talks and thinks 
in terms of speed, landing speed, stalling speed, best gliding speed, climbing 
speed, range or endurance speed, and so on. The experimenter on the ground, 
on the other hand, especially if he does wind tunnel work, is inclined to talk 
and think in terms of angle, stalling angle, angle of attack for flattest glide, 
longest range, and so on. This difference of approach is very natural. The pilot, 
after all, has little choice if he does not know the angle of attack but does know 
the speed. To the experimenter on the ground, speed is rather meaningless; he 
can alter the angle of attack and still keep the speed constant -- something that 
the pilot cannot do. But, however natural the difference of outlook, it is unfor- 
tunate; and it is undoubtedly one of the causes of the gap between the two 
essential partners to progress, the practitioner and the theorist. 
12 
12 
12 
12 
163 
LEVEL FLIGHT 
Let us examine our general statement more critically by working out some 
figures. Suppose the mass of an aeroplane is 5100 kg (so that its weight will be 
approximately 50 000 newtons and that its wing area is 26.05 m2, i.e. a wing 
loading of about 1920 N/m2. Assume that the aerofoil section has the lift 
characteristics shown in the lift curve in Fig. 3.13. Consider first the ground 
level condition, the air density being 1.225 kg/m3. 
Whatever the speed, the lift must be equal to the weight, 50 kN; but the 
lift must also be equal to CL . rV2. S, so 
50000 CL  
1.225 V2 26.05 
from which 
12 
12 
164 MECHANICS OF FLIGHT 
Min. speed
Air speed, metres per second 
Air speed, knots 
Lift coefficient
Maximum CL of aerofoil 
3.5 
3.0 
2.5 
2.0 
1.5 
1.0 
0.5 
060 
100 
140 
180 
220 
260 
300 
15° 
9° 
6° 
4° 2.6° 1.8° 1° 0.5° 0.2° 0° --0.4° 
0 
50 
75 
100 
125 
150 
Fig 5.9 Air speed, lift coefficient and angle of attack 
Aeroplane of weight 50 kN (5100 kgf); wing area 25.05 m2; wing loading 
1920 N/m2 (196 kgf/m2); aerofoil section characteristics Figs 3.13, 3.15, 
3.16 and 3.17. 
CL 3134/V2 
Now insert values for V of 60, 80, 100 and other values up to 300 knots, con- 
verting them, of course, to m/s, and work out the corresponding values of CL; 
then by referring to Fig. 3.13 read off the angle of attack for each speed. The 
result will be something like that shown in Table 5.1 and in Fig. 5.9. The 
angles given in the table are approximate since all the values are small. 
Now let us see what this table and graph mean; we shall find it very inter- 
esting. In the first place at speeds below about 100 knots, the lift coefficient 
needed for level flight is greater than the maximum lift coefficient (1.18) pro- 
vided by the aerofoil, therefore level flight is not possible below this speed. 
Secondly, as the speed increases to 120, 140, 160 knots, etc., the angle of 
attack decreases from 15° to 9°, 6°, 4°, etc.; and for each speed there is a cor- 
responding angle of attack. We should notice, in passing, that at comparatively 
low speeds there is much greater change in angle of attack for each 20 knots 
increase in air speed than there is at the higher speeds, e.g. the angle of attack 
at 120 knots is 6° less than at 100 knots, whereas at 280 knots it is only 0.2° 
less than at 260 knots. This change in proportion is interesting, and is one of 
the arguments for an angle of attack indicator, which is sensitive at low speeds, 
which is just where the air speed indicator is most unsatisfactory. 
We could, of course, continue Table 5.1 speeds higher than 300 knots, and 
we should find that we needed even smaller lift coefficients, and even more 
negative angles of attack (though never less than 21.8° since at this angle there 
would be no lift, whatever the speed). But at this stage we must begin to con- 
sider another factor affecting speed range, namely the power of the engine. 
What we have worked out so far is accurate enough, provided we can be sure 
165 
LEVEL FLIGHT 
Air speed 
V2 
CL 3134/V2 Angle of attack 
knots 
m/s 
60 
30.8 
949 3.31 
-- 
80 
41.2 
1697 1.85 
-- 
100 
51.5 
2652 1.18 
15° 
120 
61.8 
3819 0.82 
9° 
140 
72.0 
5184 0.60 
6° 
160 
82.4 
6790 0.46 
4° 
180 
92.6 
8580 0.37 
2.6° 
200 
103.0 10 600 0.30 
1.8° 
220 
113.2 12 800 0.24 
1° 
240 
123.7 15 400 0.20 
0.5° 
260 
134.0 18 000 0.17 
0.2° 
280 
144.0 20 740 0.15 
0° 
300 
154.0 23 700 0.13 
 0.4° 
Table 5.1 Angle of attack derived from airspeed 
of obtaining sufficient thrust. It may be that at speeds of 300 knots or above 
or, for that matter, at 100 knots or below, we shall not be able to maintain 
level flight for the simple reason that we have not sufficient engine power to 
overcome the drag. So the engine power will also determine the speed range, 
not only the top speed, but also to some extent the minimum speed. 
If the reader thinks that the minimum speed of this aeroplane is rather high, 
we should perhaps point out, first, that we have not used flaps; secondly, that 
the aerofoil does not given a very high maximum lift coefficient; and, thirdly, 
that it has a fairly high wing loading, or ratio of weight to wing area, which, 
as we shall see later, has an important influence on minimum speed. All we 
wish to establish now is the relationship between air speed and angle of attack, 
and this is clearly shown by Table 5.1. 
Effect of height 
Table 5.1 was worked out for ground level conditions. What will be the effect 
of height on the relationship between air speed and angle of attack? The 
answer, once it is understood, is simple -- but very important. 
Whatever the height, the air speed indicator reading is determined by 
the pressure rV2. In this expression, V is the true air speed. As has already 
been explained in Chapter 2, when the air speed indicator reads 200 knots at 
3000 m, it simply means that the difference in pressure between pitot and static 
tubes (i.e. rV2) is the same as when the air speed was 200 knots at ground 
level. Now, it is not only the pitot pressure that depends on rV2; so do the lift 
and the drag. Therefore, at the same value of rV2, i.e. at the same indicated 
speed, the lift and drag will be the same as at ground level, other things (such 
as CL) being equal. Therefore the table remains equally true at all heights, pro- 
vided the air speed referred to is the indicated speed, and not the true speed. 
Thus the angle of attack, or the attitude of the aeroplane to the air, is the same 
in level flight at all heights, provided the indicated air speed remains the same. 
Effect of weight 
The table was worked out for a constant weight of 50 kN. What will be the 
effect of changes of weight such as must occur in practical flight owing to fuel 
consumption, etc.? The answer to this is not quite so simple. 
Suppose the weight is reduced from 50 kN to 40 kN. At the same indicated 
air speed, the angle of attack would be the same, and the lift would be the 
same as previously, i.e. 50 kN. This would be too great. Therefore, in order to 
reduce the lift, we must adjust the attitude, so that the wings strike the air at 
a smaller angle of attack, or we must reduce the speed, or both. Whatever we 
12 
12 
12 
12 
166 MECHANICS OF FLIGHT 
do, we shall get a slightly different relationship between air speed and angle of 
attack: the reader is advised to work out the figures for a weight of 40 kN. 
Although the relationship will differ from that for 50 kN weight, it will again 
remain constant at all heights for the same indicated speeds. To sum up the 
effect of weight, we can say that the less the total weight of the aircraft, the 
less will be the indicated air speed corresponding to a given angle of attack. A 
little calculation will show that the indicated air speed for the same angle of 
attack will be in proportion to the square root of the total weight. 
Flying for maximum range -- propeller propulsion 
Whether in war or peace, we shall often wish to use an aircraft to best advan- 
tage for some particular purpose -- it may be to fly as fast as possible, or as 
slowly as possible, or to climb at maximum rate, or to stay in the air as long 
as possible, or, perhaps, most important of all, to achieve the maximum dis- 
tance on a given quantity of fuel. Flying for maximum range is one of the 
outstanding problems of practical flight, but it is also one of the best illustra- 
tions of the principles involved. To exploit his engine and aircraft to the 
utmost in this respect, a pilot must be not only a good flier, but also an intel- 
ligent one. 
The problem concerns engine, propeller and aircraft; it also concerns the 
wind. In this book we are interested chiefly in the aircraft, but we cannot solve 
this problem, and indeed we can solve few, if any, of the problems of flight, 
without at least some consideration of the engine and the propeller, or jet, or 
rocket, or whatever it may be, and how the pilot should use them to get the 
best out of his aircraft. As for the wind, we shall, as usual in this subject, first 
consider a condition of still air. 
The object in any engine regardless of type is to burn fuel so as to get energy 
and then to convert this energy into mechanical work. In order to get the 
greatest amount of work from a given amount of fuel, we must, first of all, get 
the maximum amount of energy out of it, and then we must change it to mech- 
anical work in the most efficient way. Our success or otherwise will clearly 
depend to some extent on the use of the best fuel for the purpose, and on the 
skill of the engine designer. But the pilot, too, must play his part. To get the 
most heat from the fuel, it must be properly burned; this means that the 
mixture of air to fuel must be correct. In a piston engine, what is usually called 
'weak mixture' is, in fact, not so very weak, but approximately the correct 
mixture to burn the fuel properly. If we use a richer mixture, some of the fuel 
will not be properly burned, and we shall get less energy from the same 
amount of fuel: we may get other advantages, but we shall not get economy. 
Both the manifold pressure and the revolutions per minute will affect the 
efficiency of the engine in its capacity of converting energy to work. The 
problem of the best combination of boost and rpm, though interesting, is 
167 
LEVEL FLIGHT 
outside the scope of this book and at this stage, too, the principles of the recip- 
rocating and turbine engine begin to differ, while the rocket or ramjet has not 
got any rpm! For the reciprocating engine we can sum up the engine and pro- 
peller problem by saying that, generally speaking, the pilot will be using them 
to best advantage if he uses weak mixture, the highest boost permissible in 
weak mixture, and the lowest rpm consistent with the charging of the elec- 
trical generator and the avoidance of detonation. All this has assumed that he 
has control over such factors, and that the engine is supercharged and that the 
propeller has controllable pitch. Without such complications, the pilot's job 
will, of course, be easier; but the chances are that, whereas a poor pilot may 
get better results, the good pilot will get worse -- far, far worse. 
Before we leave the question of the engine and propeller, let us look at a 
problem which affects all engines in which fuel is burnt to give mechanical 
energy -- not just piston engines. 
The problem is that we cannot convert all the energy produced by burning 
the fuel into mechanical work, however hard we try. What is more, although 
in a sense we are always trying to do this (and then call the engine inefficient 
because we do not succeed!) we know quite well why we cannot and never will 
do it -- it is just contrary to the laws of thermodynamics, the laws that govern 
the conversion of energy into mechanical work. All we can get, even in the best 
engines and in the hands of the best pilots, is something like 30 per cent of this 
figure. From each litre of fuel we can expect to get about 31 780 000 joules of 
thermal energy and hence only 0.3 31 780 000 joules i.e. about 9 500 000 
joules or newton metres of mechanical energy. 
This is what the engine should give to the propeller; and we may lose 20 per 
cent of it due to the inefficiency of the propeller, and so the aircraft will only 
get about 80 per cent of 9 500 000, i.e. about 7 600 000 joules, or newton 
metres. 
It still seems a large figure -- it is a large figure -- but, as we shall see, it will 
not take the aircraft very far. However at this stage we are not so much con- 
cerned with the numerical value, as with the unit, and to think of it in the form 
of the newton metre. We have found that a litre of fuel, if used in the best poss- 
ible way (we have said nothing about how quickly or slowly we use it) will 
give to the aircraft so many newton metres. Suppose, then, that we want to 
move the aircraft the maximum number of metres, we must pull it with the 
minimum number of newtons, i.e. with minimum force. That simple principle 
is the essence of flying for range. 
Let us examine it more closely. It means that we must fly so that the pro- 
peller gives the least thrust with which level flight is possible. Least thrust 
means least drag, because drag and thrust will be equal. 
168 MECHANICS OF FLIGHT 
Flying with minimum drag 
Now, on first thoughts, we might think that flying with minimum drag meant 
presenting the aeroplane to the air in such an attitude that it would be most 
streamlined; in other words, in the attitude that would give least drag if a 
model of the aircraft were tested in a wind tunnel. But if we think again, we 
shall soon realise that such an idea is erroneous. This 'streamlined attitude' 
would mean high speed, and the high speed would more than make up for the 
effects of presenting the aeroplane to the air at a good attitude; in a sense, of 
course, it is the streamlined attitude that enables us to get the high speed and 
the high speed, in turn, causes drag. We are spending too much effort in trying 
to go fast. 
On the other hand, we must not imagine, as we well might, that we will be 
flying with least drag if we fly at the minimum speed of level flight. This would 
mean a large angle of attack, 15° or more, and the induced drag particularly 
would be very high -- we would be spending too much effort in keeping up in 
the air. 
There must be some compromise between these two extremes -- it would 
not be an aeroplane if there was not a compromise in it somewhere. Perhaps, 
too, it would not be an aeroplane if the solution were not rather obvious -- 
once it has been pointed out to us! Since the lift must always equal the weight, 
which we have assumed to be constant at 50 kN, the drag will be least when 
the lift/drag ratio is greatest. Now, the curve of lift/drag ratio given in Fig. 3.16 
refers to the aerofoil only. The values of this ratio will be less when applied to 
the whole aeroplane, since the lift will be little, if any greater, than that of the 
wing alone, whereas the drag will be considerably more, perhaps twice as 
much. Furthermore, the change of the ratio at different angles of attack, in 
other words, the shape of the curve, will not be quite the same for the whole 
aeroplane. None the less, there will be a maximum value of, say 12 to 1 at 
about the same angle of attack that gave the best value for the wing, i.e. at 3° 
or 4°, and the curve will fall off on each side of the maximum, so that the 
lift/drag ratio will be less, i.e. the drag will be greater, whether we fly at a 
smaller or a greater angle of attack than 4°; in other words, at a greater or less 
speed than that corresponding to 4°, which our table showed to be 160 knots. 
A typical lift/drag curve for a complete aeroplane is shown later on in Fig. 
6.3, and Table 5.2 shows the sort of figures we shall get from it, 
This table is very instructive, and shows quite clearly the effect of different 
air speeds in level flight on the total drag that will be experienced. It shows, 
too, that the least total drag is at the best lift/drag ratio, which in this case is 
at 4° angle of attack, which, in turn, is at about 160 knots air speed (Fig. 5.10, 
overleaf). 
The angle of attack that gives the best lift/drag ratio will be the same what- 
ever the height and whatever the weight; it is simply a question of presenting 
the aeroplane to the air at the best attitude, and has nothing to do with the 
169 
LEVEL FLIGHT 
density of the air, or the loads that are carried inside the aeroplane, or even the 
method of propulsion. 
This means that the indicated air speed, which is what the pilot must go by, 
will be the same, whatever the height, but will increase slightly for increased 
loads. The same indicated air speed means the same drag at any height, and 
therefore the same range. 
On the other hand, the higher speed which must be used for increased 
weights means greater drag, because, looking at it very simply, even the same 
lift/drag ratio means a greater drag if the lift is greater. So added weight means 
added drag -- in proportion -- and therefore less range -- also in proportion. 
Let us go back to the newton metres, the 7 600 000 joules that we hope to 
get from 1 litre of fuel. How far can we fly on this? At 100 knots we shall be 
able to go 7 600 000 divided by 8330, i.e. about 912 metres; at 120 knots 
1610 m; at 140 knots 1792 m; at 160 knots 1822 m; at 180 knots 1627 m; at 
200 knots 1292 m; and at 220, 240, 260 and 280 knots, 1095, 912, 790, 684 
metres respectively, and at 300 knots only 577 metres. These will apply at 
whatever height we fly. If the load is 60 kN instead of 50 kN each distance 
must be divided by 60/50, i.e. by 1.20; if the load is less than 50 kN each dis- 
tance will be correspondingly greater. 
Now to sum up this interesting argument: in order to obtain the maximum 
range, we must fly at a given angle of attack, i.e. at a given indicated air speed, 
we may fly at any height, and we should carry the minimum load; but if we 
must carry extra load, we must increase the air speed. 
That is the whole thing in a nutshell from the aeroplane's point of view. 
Unfortunately, there are considerations of engine and propeller efficiency, and 
of wind, which may make it advisable to depart to some extent from these 
simple rules, and there are essential differences between jet and propeller 
propulsion in these respects. We cannot enter into these problems in detail, but 
a brief survey of the practical effects is given in the next paragraphs. 
170 MECHANICS OF FLIGHT 
Air speed Angle of attack L/D ratio 
Total drag 
knots m/s 
Wing Aeroplane newtons 
100 51.5 15° 
10.7 6.0 
8330 
120 61.8 
9° 
17.2 10.6 
4720 
140 72.0 
6° 
20.6 11.8 
4240 
160 82.4 
4° 
22.7 12.0 
4170 
180 92.6 2.6° 
23.8 10.7 
4670 
200 103.0 1.7° 
22.8 8.5 
5880 
220 113.2 
1° 
20.8 7.2 
6940 
240 123.7 0.5° 
18.8 6.0 
8330 
260 134.0 0.2° 
16.4 5.2 
9615 
280 144.0 
0° 
13.9 4.5 
11 110 
300 154.0  0.4° 
12.8 3.8 
13 160 
Table 5.2 Airspeed and drag 
Another way of thinking of the significance of flying with minimum drag is 
to divide the total drag into induced drag -- which decreases in proportion to 
the square of the speed -- and all-the-remainder of the drag -- which increases 
in proportion to the square of the speed. This idea is well illustrated in Fig. 
5.10 and in the numerical examples (Appendix 3). 
Effects of height -- propeller propulsion 
So far as the aeroplane is concerned, we will get the same range and we should 
fly at the same indicated speed, whatever the height. Now, although the drag 
is the same at the same indicated speed at all heights, the power is not. This 
may sound strange, but it is a very important fact. If it were not so, if we 
needed the same power to fly at the same indicated speed at all heights, then 
the advantage would always be to fly high, the higher the better, because for 
the same power the higher we went, the greater would be our true speed. 
However, it can hardly be considered a proof that an idea is incorrect simply 
because it would be very nice if it were correct. The real explanation is quite 
simple. Power is the rate of doing work. Our fuel gives us so many newton 
metres, however long we take to use it. But if we want the work done quickly, 
if we want to pull with a certain thrust through a certain distance in a certain 
time, then the power will depend on the thrust and the distance and the time, 
171 
LEVEL FLIGHT 
Air speed, metres per second 
Air speed, knots 
Drag, kilonewtons
Drag, kilograms-force
Min. drag speed 
Total drag 
Remainder 
of drag 
8 
6 
4 
2 
00 
50 
100 
150 
200 
250 
300 
800 
600 
400 
200 
0 
25 
50 
75 
100 
125 
150 
Induced 
drag 
Y 
Fig 5.10 Flying for maximum range: how the total drag is made up 
Induced drag decreases with square of speed. Remainder of drag 
increases with square of speed. Total drag is the sum of the two; and is a 
minimum when they are equal. 
in other words, on the thrust and the velocity. But which velocity, indicated or 
true? Perhaps it is easier to answer that if we put the question as, which dis- 
tance? Well, there is only one distance, the actual distance moved, the true 
distance. So it is the true air speed that settles the power. The higher we go, the 
greater is the true air speed for the same indicated speed and therefore the 
greater the power required, although the thrust and the drag remain the same. 
Now a reciprocating engine can be designed to work most efficiently at 
some considerable height above sea-level, if it is supercharged. If we use it at 
sea-level, and if we fly at the best speed for range, the thrust will be a 
minimum, that is what we want, but, owing to the lower speed, little power 
will be required from the engine. That may sound satisfactory, but actually it 
is not economical; the engine must be throttled, the venturi tube in its carbu- 
rettor is partially closed, the engine is held in check and does not run at its 
designed power, and, what is more important, does not give of its best 
efficiency; we can say almost literally that it does not give best value for 
money. In some cases this effect is so marked that it actually pays us, if we 
must fly at sea-level, to fly considerably faster than our best speed and use 
more power, thereby using the aeroplane less efficiently but the engine more 
efficiently. But to obtain maximum range, both aircraft and engine should be 
used to the best advantage, and this can easily be done if we choose a greater 
height such that when we fly at the correct indicated speed from the point of 
view of the aeroplane, the engine is also working most efficiently, that is to say, 
the throttle valve is fully open, but we can still fly with a weak mixture. At this 
height, which may be, say, 15 000 ft (4570 m), we shall get the best out of both 
aeroplane and engine, and so will obtain maximum range. 
Here the reader may be wondering what governs the operating height the 
designer chooses. This may be selected for terrain clearance, cruise above 
likely adverse weather conditions or the engine may be sized for take-off per- 
formance and the cruising altitude follows as a by-product to give full throttle 
cruise. 
What happens at greater heights? At the same indicated speed we shall need 
more and more power; but if the throttle is fully open, we cannot get more 
power without using a richer mixture. Therefore we must either reduce speed 
and use the aircraft uneconomically, or we must enrich the mixture and use the 
engine uneconomically. 
Thus there is a best height at which to fly, but the height is determined by 
the engine efficiency (and to some extent by propeller efficiency) and not by 
the aircraft, which would be equally good at all heights. The best height is not 
usually very critical, nor is there generally any great loss in range by flying 
below that height. It may well be that considerations of wind, such as are 
explained in the next paragraph, make it advisable to do so. 
172 MECHANICS OF FLIGHT 
Range flying -- effects of wind 
If the flight is to be made from A towards B and back to A, then wind of any 
strength from any direction will adversely affect the radius of action. This fact, 
which at first sounds rather strange, but which is well known to all students 
of navigation, can easily be verified by working out a few simple examples, 
taking at first a head and tail wind, and then various cross-winds. But the wind 
usually changes in direction and increases in velocity with height, and so a 
skilful pilot can sometimes pick his height to best advantage and so gain more 
by getting the best, or the least bad, effect from the wind than he may lose by 
flying at a height that is slightly uneconomical from other points of view. It 
may pay him, too, to modify his air speed slightly according to the strength of 
the wind, but these are really problems of navigation rather than of the 
mechanics of flight. 
Flying for endurance -- propeller propulsion 
We may sometimes want to stay in the air for the longest possible time on a 
given quantity of fuel. This is not the same consideration as flying for 
maximum range. To get maximum endurance, we must use the least possible 
fuel in a given time, that is to say, we must use minimum power. But, as 
already explained, power means drag velocity, the velocity being true air 
speed. Let us look back to Table 5.2 showing total drag against air speed; mul- 
tiply the drag by the air speed and see what happens. 
Table 5.2 shows that, although the drag is least at about 160 knots, the 
power is least at about 125 knots (see also Fig. 5.11, overleaf). The expla- 
nation is quite simple; by flying slightly slower, we gain more (from the power 
point of view) by the reduced speed than we lose by the increased drag. 
Therefore the speed for best endurance is less than the speed for best range 
and, since we are now concerned with true speed, the lower the height, the 
better. 
The endurance speed is apt to be uncomfortably low for accurate flying; 
even the best range speed is not always easy and, as neither is very critical, the 
pilot is often recommended to fly at a somewhat higher speed. 
The reader who would like to consider endurance flying a little further 
should look back to The Ideal Aerofoil in Chapter 3. Among the desirable 
qualities was a high maximum value of C3G2 
L/CD -- the quality which means 
minimum power, i.e. maximum endurance. 
There we were considering only the aerofoil, and the aeroplane is not quite 
the same thing as regards values, but the idea is the same. So for endurance 
flying we must present the aeroplane to the air at the angle of attack that gives 
the best value of C3G2 
L/CD (for the aeroplane), and this will be a greater angle 
of attack and so a lower speed, than for range. 
173 
LEVEL FLIGHT 
Flying for range -- jet propulsion 
In trying to get maximum range or endurance out of any aircraft we are, in 
effect, simply trying to get maximum value for money, the value being the 
174 MECHANICS OF FLIGHT 
Air speed 
Drag 
Drag Air speed Power 
knots 
m/s 
newtons 
kW 
100 
51.5 
8330 
428 995 
429 
120 
61.8 
4720 
291 696 
292 
140 
72.0 
4240 
305 280 
305 
160 
82.4 
4170 
343 608 
344 
180 
92.6 
4670 
432 442 
432 
200 
103.0 
5880 
605 640 
606 
220 
113.2 
6940 
785 608 
786 
240 
123.7 
8330 
1 030 421 
1030 
260 
134.0 
9615 
1 288 410 
1288 
280 
144.0 11 110 
1 599 840 
1600 
300 
154.0 13 160 
2 026 640 
2027 
Air speed, metres per second 
Air speed, knots 
Min. power speed 
Power required 
2000 
0 
50 
100 
150 
200 
250 
300 
0 
25 
50 
75 
100 
125 
150 
Min. drag speed 
1500 
1000 
500 
0 
X 
A 
B 
Power required, kilowatts
Fig 5.11 Flying for maximum endurance. Maximum endurance is at 
speed of minimum power (X). Maximum range (minimum drag) is at 
speed B since AB/OB Power/Speed (Drag Speed)/Speed Drag, 
and AB/OB is least when OA is a tangent to the power curve. 
Table 5.3 Airspeed, drag and power 
range or endurance and the money being the fuel used. We shall only get the 
maximum overall efficiency if in turn we get the maximum efficiency at each 
stage of the conversion of the fuel into useful work done. The three main 
stages are the engine, the system of propulsion, and the aeroplane. 
This applies to every type of aircraft -- it is necessary to emphasise this point 
because there seems to be a growing tendency to think that jet or rocket 
propulsion involves completely new principles. This is not so -- the principles 
are exactly the same, the only difference lies in the degree of importance of the 
various efficiencies. 
From the point of view of an aeroplane, flying for maximum range means 
flying with minimum drag. It is in that condition that the aeroplane is most 
efficient no matter by what means it is driven. But if, when we fly with 
minimum drag, either the propulsive system, or the engine, or both, are hope- 
lessly inefficient -- then, rather obviously, it will pay us to make some 
compromise, probably by flying rather faster than the minimum drag speed. 
From the point of view of an aeroplane, as an aeroplane, we shall obtain 
the same range at whatever height we fly, provided we fly in the attitude of 
minimum drag. But if at some heights the propulsive system, or the engine, or 
both, are more efficient than at other heights -- then, rather obviously, it will 
pay us to fly at those heights so as to get the maximum overall value out of the 
engine-propulsion-aeroplane system. 
Now an aeroplane is an aeroplane whether it is driven by propeller or jet 
and, as an aeroplane, the same rules for range flying will apply. But when the 
efficiencies of the propulsion system and the engine are included the overall 
effects are rather different. In the propeller-driven aeroplane we do not go far 
wrong if we obey the aeroplane rules although, even so, it usually pays us to 
fly rather faster than the minimum drag speed because, by so doing, engine 
and propeller efficiency is improved -- and flying is more comfortable. It also 
definitely pays us to fly at a certain height because at that height the engine- 
propeller combination is more efficient. But in the main it is the aeroplane 
efficiency that decides the issue. Not so with the jet aircraft. 
There are two important reasons for the difference -- 
1. Whereas the thrust of a propeller falls off as forward speed increases, the 
thrust of a jet is nearly constant at all speeds (at the same rpm). 
2. Whereas the fuel consumption in a reciprocating engine is approximately 
proportional to the power developed, the fuel consumption in jet propul- 
sion is approximately proportional to the thrust. 
Both of these are really connected with the fact that the efficiency of the jet 
propulsion system increases with speed, and this increase in efficiency is so 
important that it is absolutely necessary to take it into account, as well as the 
efficiency of the aeroplane. When we do so we find that we shall get greater 
range if we fly a great deal faster than the minimum drag speed. The drag will 
175 
LEVEL FLIGHT 
176 MECHANICS OF FLIGHT 
Air speed Drag/Speed 
Air speed Drag/Speed 
100 
8330/100 83.3 220 
6940/220 31.5 
120 
4720/120 39.3 240 
8330/240 34.7 
140 
4240/140 30.3 260 
9615/260 37.0 
160 
4170/160 26.1 280 
11 110/280 39.7 
180 
4670/180 25.9 300 
13 160/300 43.9 
200 
5880/200 29.4 
be slightly greater -- not much, because we are on the low portion of the curve 
(Fig. 5.12) -- the thrust, being equal to the drag, will also of course be slightly 
greater, and so will the fuel consumption in litres per hour. The speed, on the 
other hand, will be considerably greater and so we shall get more miles per 
hour. Everything, in fact, depends on getting the maximum of speed compared 
with thrust, or speed compared with drag. In short, we must fly at minimum 
drag/speed which as the figure shows, will always occur at a higher speed than 
that giving minimum drag (Fig. 5.12). So to get maximum range jet aircraft 
must fly faster than propeller-driven aircraft -- the difference being due to the 
different relationship between efficiency and speed in the two systems. 
As a matter of interest let us go back to the figures and work out for each 
speed the value of drag/speed (Table 5.4). 
Since, in this instance, we are only concerned with the air speed at which 
minimum drag/speed occurs, there is no need to convert the knots to m/s. 
Note that the minimum value for drag/speed is at about 175 knots, so the 
range speed for this aircraft, if driven by jets, is 175 instead of 160 knots; but, 
what is more important, note the shape of the drag/speed curve (Fig. 5.13, 
overleaf); whereas the other curves rise fairly steeply above the minimum value 
the drag/speed curve hardly rises at all between 170 and 280 knots, so with jet 
propulsion we can get good range anywhere between these speeds. 
At what height shall we fly? That is an easy one to answer. We know that 
it makes no difference as far as the efficiency of the aeroplane is concerned -- 
but it makes all the difference to the efficiency of jet propulsion. The aircraft 
will be in the same attitude, and we shall get the same drag and the same 
thrust, if we fly at the same indicated speed at altitude -- but the true speed will 
be greater. Now it is the true speed that largely settles the overall efficiency so 
at 40 000 ft (12 200 m), where the true speed is doubled, the efficiency will be 
greatly increased, and, provided the fuel consumption remains proportional to 
thrust, the range will be similarly increased. So to get range on jet aircraft -- fly 
high. 
Since modern flights in jet aircraft may take place at heights such as 40 000 
or 50 000 ft (12 200 m or 15 200 m) quite a large proportion of the flights may 
be spent in climbing and descending, and in order to obtain maximum range 
rather different speeds may be required say for climbing and for the level 
Table 5.4 Air speed and drag ratios 
portion of the flight. The best speed, for instance, for a cruising climb may be 
1.3 speed for minimum drag, and for level flight 1.2 speed for minimum 
drag, i.e. for the aeroplane which we have considered, 208 and 192 knots 
respectively. 
Flying for endurance -- jet propulsion 
If the argument has been followed so far, there will be no difficulty in under- 
standing the problem of maximum endurance for jet-driven aircraft. Since fuel 
consumption is roughly proportional to thrust, we shall get maximum 
endurance by flying with minimum thrust, i.e. with minimum drag. So the 
endurance speed of a jet aircraft corresponds closely to the range speed of a 
propeller-driven aircraft, and from the comfort point of view, this makes the 
jet aircraft easier to fly in the condition of maximum endurance. 
Since the thrust, and hence the consumption, should be the same at the 
same indicated speed at any height, it should not matter at what height we fly 
for endurance. 
177 
LEVEL FLIGHT 
O 
Air speed, metres per second 
Air speed, knots 
Drag, kilonewtons
Drag, kilograms-force
Air speed
for min. power
8 
6 
4 
2 
00 
50 
100 
150 
200 
250 
300 
800 
600 
400 
200 
0 
25 
50 
75 
100 
125 
150 
Air speed
for min. drag
Air speed giving 
min. drag/speed 
P 
Q 
Fig 5.12 Flying for range: jet propulsion 
The tangent OP to the curve of total drag gives the air speed Q at which 
drag/speed is a minimum. 
Summary 
Table 5.5 and Fig. 5.13 summarise the difference between jet and propeller- 
driven aircraft so far as range and endurance are concerned. They must be 
considered as a first approximation only -- they take into account the aero- 
plane efficiency for the propeller-driven type (neglecting propeller and engine 
efficiency), and both aeroplane and propulsive efficiency for the jet-driven type 
(neglecting engine efficiency). All this means is that the more important factors 
have been taken into account, and the less important factors have been neg- 
lected. It is not the whole story, and should not be considered as such. 
The figures in brackets in Table 5.5 are the speeds in knots for the particular 
aircraft that has been considered in this chapter. 
178 MECHANICS OF FLIGHT 
Propeller 
Jet 
Speed for maximum Minimum drag (160) Minimum drag/speed 
range 
(175 up to 280) 
Height for maximum Unimportant 
High 
range 
Speed for maximum Minimum power (125) Minimum drag (160) 
endurance 
Height for maximum Low 
Unimportant 
endurance 
Min. power
125 knots
Min. drag
800 
600 
400 
200 
0100 120 140 160 180 200 220 240 
80 
60 
40 
20 
0 
60 
70 
80 
90 100 110 
Power 
kW 
Drag 
kN8 
6 
4 
2 
Air speed, metres per second 
Power 
Drag/speed 
Drag 
Air speed, knots 
Drag/speed
Power, drag and drag/speed
160 knots
Min. drag/
speed
175 knots
Max. endurance 
(propeller) 
Max. range 
(propeller) 
Max. endurance 
(jet) 
Max. range 
(jet) 
Fig 5.13 Power, drag and drag/speed curves 
Table 5.5 Range and endurance differences 
Before leaving this important subject it should be made clear that flying 
control regulations, made in the interests of safety, may sometimes make it 
necessary to fly at flight levels which do not exactly correspond to the best 
interests of either aircraft or engines. 
Can you answer these? 
1. What are the four most important forces which act upon an aeroplane 
during flight? 
2. What are the conditions of equilibrium of these four forces? 
3. Are these forces likely to alter in value, and to move their line of action 
during flight? 
4. Explain how it is that an aeroplane can fly level at a wide range of air 
speeds. 
5. Is the relationship between air speed and angle of attack the same at height 
as at sea-level? 
6. What is the effect of weight on the relationship between air speed and 
angle of attack? 
7. On a propeller-driven aircraft -- 
(a) Why will we get less range if we fly too high? 
(b) At what height should we fly for best endurance? 
(c) Why is the air speed for best endurance different from the air speed 
for best range? 
8. On a jet-driven aircraft -- 
(a) Under what conditions should we fly for maximum range? 
(b) At what height should we fly for maximum range? 
(c) At what speed and height should we fly for maximum endurance? 
For solutions see Appendix 5. 
In Appendix 3 you will find some simple numerical examples on the problems 
of level flight. 
179 
LEVEL FLIGHT 
Gliding 
Let us next consider the flight of an aeroplane while gliding under the influ- 
ence of the force of gravity and without the use of the engine. 
Of the four forces, we are now deprived of the thrust, and therefore when 
the aeroplane is travelling in a steady glide it must be kept in a state of equi- 
librium by the lift, drag, and weight only. This means that the total 
aerodynamic force -- that is to say, the resultant of the lift and drag -- must be 
exactly equal and opposite to the weight (see Fig. 6.1). But the lift is now at 
right angles to the path of the glide, while the drag acts directly backwards 
parallel to the gliding path. 
Gliding and landing 
CHAPTER6 
Total aerodynamic
force
Path of glide 
Horizontal 
a° 
L 
W 
D 
a° 
Fig 6.1 Forces acting on an aeroplane during a glide 
Gliding angle 
By a process of simple geometry, it is easy to see that the angle formed between 
the lift and the total aerodynamic force is the same as the angle a between the 
path of the glide and the horizontal, which is called the gliding angle. 
Therefore 
D/L tana 
This means that the less lower value of D/L -- i.e. the greater the value of L/D 
-- the flatter will be the gliding angle. 
From this simple fact we can very easily come to some important conclu- 
sions; for instance -- 
1. The tangent of the gliding angle is directly dependent on the L/D, which 
is really the 'efficiency' of the design of the aeroplane, and therefore the 
more 'efficient' the aeroplane, the farther it will glide, or, expressing it the 
other way round, the measurement of the angle of glide will give a simple 
estimate of the efficiency of the aeroplane. 
The word 'efficiency' is apt to have a rather vague meaning, and we are 
using it here in a particular sense. We are concerned only with the success 
or otherwise of the designer in obtaining the maximum amount of lift with 
the minimum of drag, or what might be called the 'aerodynamic' merit of 
the aeroplane. For instance, our conclusion shows that any improvement 
which reduces the drag will result in a flatter gliding angle. 
It will be noticed that this is the same criterion as for maximum range, so 
that an aeroplane that has a flat gliding angle should also be efficient at 
flying for range, neglecting the influence of the propulsion efficiency. 
2. If an aeroplane is to glide as far as possible, the angle of attack during the 
glide must be such that the lift/drag is a maximum. 
The aeroplane is so constructed that the riggers' angle of incidence is a 
small angle of, say, 2° or 3°. This particular angle is chosen because it is 
the most suitable for level flight. As was explained when considering the 
characteristics of aerofoils, the modern tendency is to make this angle 
rather less than the angle of maximum L/D (because we are out for speed), 
but, even so, it will be within a degree or so of that angle, so it is true to 
say that the angle of attack during a flat glide will be very nearly the same 
as that during straight and level flight, and almost exactly the same as 
when flying for maximum range with piston engines. 
The pilot finds it fairly easy to maintain ordinary horizontal flight at the 
most efficient angle because the fuselage is then in a more or less hori- 
181 
GLIDING AND LANDING 
zontal position. When gliding however, the task is not always so easy. 
Sophisticated modern aircraft may be fitted with an angle of attack indi- 
cator, but on older and simpler types this is not normally the case. 
Fortunately, as in level flight, there is a direct connection between the air 
speed and the angle of attack, and therefore the air speed can be found 
which gives the best gliding angle, and this acts as a guide to the pilot. The 
fact remains, however, that it requires considerable skill, instinct, or what- 
ever one likes to call it, on the part of a pilot to glide at the flattest possible 
angle. This is the type of skill which is especially needed by the pilot of a 
motorless glider or sailplane. 
It should be noted that, although there is a relationship between air speed 
and angle of attack on the glide just as there is in level flight, the relation- 
ship is not exactly the same, and the speed that gives the flattest gliding 
angle is usually rather less than the speed that gives maximum range. The 
difference, however, is small and the principle is the same. 
3. If the pilot attempts to glide at an angle of attack either greater or less than 
that which gives the best L/D, then in each case the path of descent will 
be steeper. 
Perhaps this conclusion may be considered redundant because it is simply 
another way of expressing the preceding one. It is purposely repeated in 
this form because there seems to be such a strong natural instinct on the 
part of pilots to think that if the aeroplane is put in a more horizontal atti- 
tude it will glide farther. Even if one has never flown it is not difficult to 
imagine the feelings of a pilot whose engine has failed, and who is trying 
to reach a certain field in which to make a forced landing. It gradually 
dawns on him that in the way in which he is gliding he will not reach that 
field. What, then, could be more natural than that he should pull up the 
nose of his aeroplane in his efforts to reach it? What happens? In answer 
to this question the student often says that he will stall the aeroplane. Not 
necessarily. He should in the first place have been gliding nowhere near the 
stalling angle, but at an angle of attack of only about 3° or 4°, so that he 
has many degrees through which to increase the angle before stalling. But 
what will most certainly happen is that the increase in angle will decrease 
the value of L/D and so increase the gliding angle, and although the aero- 
plane will lie flatter to the horizontal, it will glide towards the earth at a 
steeper angle and will not reach even so far as it would otherwise have 
done. The air speed during such a glide will be less than that which gives 
the best gliding angle. 
Suppose, on the other hand, that, when a pilot is gliding at the angle of attack 
which gives him the greatest value of L/D, he puts the nose of the aeroplane 
down, this will decrease the angle of attack which, as before, will decrease 
the value of L/D and therefore increase the steepness of the gliding path, the 
air speed this time being greater than that which gives the best gliding angle. 
182 MECHANICS OF FLIGHT 
It is not easy to visualise the angle of attack during a glide, and the reader, 
like the pilot, must be careful not to be confused between the direction in 
which the aeroplane is pointing and the direction in which it is travelling. 
It is hoped that the figures may help to make this important point clear 
(Figs 6.2 and 6.3, overleaf). 
In the previous chapter we discovered that the ratio of lift to drag of complete 
aeroplanes may be in the neighbourhood of 8, 10 or 12 to 1. These values cor- 
respond to gliding angles of which the tangents are 1/8, 1/10 and 1/12, i.e. 
approximately 7°, 6° and 5° respectively. Thus, neglecting the effect of wind, 
a pilot will usually be in error on the right side if he assumes that he can glide 
a kilometre for every 200 metres of height, i.e. if he reckons on a gliding angle 
of which the tangent is 1/5. 
Real and apparent angles of glide 
Let us remember once again that gliding must be considered as relative to the 
air. To an observer on the ground an aeroplane gliding into the wind may 
appear to remain still or, in some cases, even to ascend. In such instances there 
must be a wind blowing which has both a horizontal and an upward velocity, 
and to an observer travelling on this wind in a balloon the aeroplane would 
appear to be travelling forwards and descending. When viewed from the 
ground an aeroplane gliding against the wind will appear to glide more steeply, 
and will, in fact, glide more steeply relative to the ground (Fig. 6.4); and when 
gliding with the wind it will glide less steeply than the real angle measured rela- 
tive to the air -- the angle as it would appear to an observer in a free balloon. 
183 
GLIDING AND LANDING 
13° 
7° 
7° 
5° 
115 knots 
210 knots 
155 knots 
Horizontal 
Path of glide 
4° 
1° 
1 
2 
(a)( 
b)( 
c) 
Fig. 6.2 How the angle of attack affects the gliding angle 
(a) Slow glide at slope of 1 in 8 (7°). Angle of attack 13°. Speed 115 knots. 
(b) Fast glide at slope of 1 in 8 (7°). Angle of attack 1 °. Speed 210 knots. 
(c) Flattest glide at slope of 1 in 12 (5°). Angle of attack 4°. Speed 155 knots. 
Note. In the diagram the gliding angles, and the differences between 
them, have been exaggerated so as to bring out the principles. 
1 
2 
Effect of weight on gliding 
It is commonly thought that heavy aeroplanes should glide more steeply that light 
aeroplanes, but a moment's reflection will make one realise that this is not so, since 
the gliding angle depends on the ratio of lift to drag, which is quite independent of 
the weight. Neither in principle nor in fact does weight have an appreciable influ- 
ence on the gliding angle, but what it does affect is the air speed during the glide. 
184 MECHANICS OF FLIGHT 
Lift/drag ratio of aeroplane
Angle of attack 
0° 
15° 
--4° 
0° 
4° 
8° 
12° 
16° 
20° 
14 
12 
10 
8 
6 
4 
2 
P 
A 
B 
Q 
Flattest glide 
Slope 1 in 12 
Speed 155 knots 
1 in 10 glides 
Two ways of gliding at 
1in8 
Angle of attack 
Speed 210 knots 
1° 
1 
2 
Angle of attack 13° 
Speed 115 knots 
Lowest sinking speed 
Stall 
Angle of attack 15° 
Speed 105 knots 
(without flaps) 
Speed 65 knots 
(with full flap) 
Stalled glide if possible 
Two ways of descending vertically 
Angle of attack -- 2° 
Speed 500 knots? 
Angle of attack? 
Aircraft uncontrollable 
Fig 6.3 Lift/drag curve and gliding angles of aeroplane 
Gliding against 
the wind 
Gliding with 
the wind 
Distance travelled 
against the wind 
Distance travelled with the wind 
Fig 6.4 Effect of wind on angle of glide relative to the earth 
Look back for a moment at Fig. 6.1. Imagine an increase in the line repre- 
senting the weight; there will need to be a corresponding increase in the total 
aerodynamic force, and a greater lift and a greater drag. But the proportions 
will all remain exactly the same, the same lift/drag ratio, the same gliding 
angle. But the greater lift, and greater drag, can only be got by greater speed. 
If we now think back to flying for range, it will be remembered that the con- 
dition was the same: greater weight meant greater speed. But there is an 
interesting and important difference in this case. In flying for range, greater 
speed meant greater drag, greater thrust, and so less range. In gliding without 
engine power, greater speed means greater drag, but now the 'thrust' is pro- 
vided by the component of the weight which acts along the gliding path and 
this, of course, is automatically greater because the weight is greater. So 
greater weight does not affect the gliding angle and does not affect the range, 
on a pure glide -- but it does affect the speed. 
Endurance on the glide 
The conclusion of the previous paragraph might perhaps lead one to ask 
whether, in that case, there is any need for a sailplane to be built of light con- 
struction. The answer is definitely -- Yes. A sailplane (Fig. 6A, overleaf) must 
have a flat gliding angle if it is to get any distance, any range from its starting 
point; but, even more important, it must have a low rate of vertical descent or 
sinking speed; it must be able to stay a long time in the air and be able to take 
advantage of every breath of rising air, however slight. Sailplane pilots do 
sometimes add ballast so as to increase the flight speed as this can be useful 
under certain circumstances. However, a description of such advanced 
sailplane techniques is best left to books devoted specifically to that subject. It 
is easy to see that the rate of vertical descent depends both on the angle of glide 
and on the air speed during the glide. Therefore to get a low rate of descent 
we need a good lift/drag ratio, i.e. good aerodynamic design, and a low air 
speed, i.e. low weight. 
Actually we shall get a lower rate of descent by reducing speed below that 
which gives the flattest glide; this is because we gain more by the lower air 
speed than we lose by the steeper glide. Thus there is an 'endurance' speed for 
gliding just as for level flight and, as before, it is lower than the range speed, 
and corresponds to the speed for minimum power requirement. 
Disadvantages of flat gliding angle 
It should not be thought that a flat gliding angle is always an advantage; when 
approaching a small airfield near the edge of which are high obstacles, it is 
185 
GLIDING AND LANDING 
advisable to reach the ground as soon as possible after passing over such 
obstacles. In these circumstances a flat gliding angle is a definite disadvantage, 
and even if the aeroplane is dived steeply it will pick up speed and will tend to 
float across the airfield before touching the ground. 
The gliding angle can be steepened by reducing the ratio of lift to drag; this 
can be done by decreasing the angle of attack (resulting in too high a speed), 
or by increasing the angle of attack (resulting in an air speed which may be too 
low for safety), or by using an air brake (Fig. 6.5). The last is by far the most 
satisfactory means, and the air brake may take the form of some kind of flap, 
such as was described in the chapter on aerofoils; but the modern tendency is 
to use the various types of flap when lift is required, and separate air brakes 
or spoilers when drag is required. 
Landing 
The art of landing an aeroplane consists of bringing it in contact with the 
ground at the lowest possible vertical velocity and, at the same time, some- 
where near the lowest possible horizontal velocity relative to the ground. It is 
true that in certain circumstances a fast landing may be permissible, and that 
some modern aircraft are flown onto the ground in a definitely unstalled con- 
186 MECHANICS OF FLIGHT 
Fig 6A Gliding 
(By courtesy of Slingsby Sailplanes Ltd) 
The Skylark 4 with large aspect ratio and good value of lift/drag; needing 
spoilers to increase gliding angle when necessary. 
dition, but the general rule applies to the landings of many slower and lighter 
types, and especially to forced landings in which everything usually depends 
on the minimum horizontal velocity being achieved. 
The reader will have noticed that it is the horizontal velocity relative to the 
ground which must be reasonably low. Now, the first step in this direction is 
to land against the wind and so reduce the ground speed. This, however, is 
entirely up to the pilot; in our present problem we are only concerned with a 
low air speed. Given this low air speed, the pilot can, by landing into the wind 
obtain a low ground speed. In the case of landing on the decks of ships (Fig. 
6B, overleaf), if the ship herself steams into the wind, the ground speed will be 
still further reduced. Supposing, for instance, the minimum air speed of an 
aeroplane is 80 knots, the wind speed is 20 knots, and the ship is steaming at 
30 knots into the wind, then the 'ground' speed of the aeroplane when landing 
will be only 30 knots; while if the wind speed had been 50 knots, the 'ground' 
speed would have been reduced to nil -- a perfectly possible state of affairs. 
In an early chapter it was mentioned that the wind speed is apt to be irreg- 
ular near the ground, and it is when landing that such irregularity may be 
important. If the wind speed suddenly decreases, the aircraft, owing to its 
inertia, will tend to continue at the same ground speed and will therefore lose 
air speed, and, if already flying near the critical speed, may stall. Similarly, if 
the wind speed suddenly increases, the aircraft will temporarily gain air speed 
and will 'balloon' upwards, making it difficult to make contact with the 
ground at the right moment. Such instances may occur in changeable and 
gusty winds, in up-currents caused by heating of parts of the earth's surface, 
in cases of turbulence caused by the wind flowing over obstructions such as 
hills and hangars, and due to wind gradient. Of these, wind gradient is prob- 
ably the most important, and the most easily allowed for. An aeroplane, when 
landing against a high wind, will encounter a decreasing wind speed as it 
descends through the last few feet and will be in danger of stalling unless it has 
speed in hand to compensate for the air speed lost. If landing up a slope or 
towards a hangar, one may suddenly run into air which is blanketed by the 
187 
GLIDING AND LANDING 
(a) Spoiler on 
top of wing 
(c) Split 
flap 
(e) Spoiler 
round 
fuselage 
(g) Also reversible pitch propellers and jet engine thrust reversers 
(b) Spoiler 
below wing 
(d) Double 
flap 
(f) Tail 
parachute 
Fig 6.5 Air brakes 
obstruction, or a head wind may even become a following wind blowing up 
the hill or towards the hangar. In a really high wind, and when flying a small 
light aircraft, these conditions may be dangerous, and the obvious moral is to 
allow for them by approaching to land at a higher speed than usual. 
The vertical velocity of landing can be reduced to practically nothing pro- 
vided the forward velocity is sufficient to keep the aeroplane in horizontal 
flight -- that is to say, provided the lift of the wings is sufficient to balance the 
weight of the aeroplane. 
We have already seen that there is a definite relationship between the indi- 
cated air speed and the angle of attack. Fig. 6.6 illustrates the attitudes of an 
aeroplane at various speeds and the corresponding angles of attack required to 
maintain level flight: (a) shows the attitude of maximum speed; (b) that of 
normal cruising flight; (c) that for an ordinary landing; and (d) the attitude 
when fitted with flaps and slots and flying as slowly as possible. 
Now, since lift must equal weight, and must also equal CL . rV2 . S, it is 
quite obvious that if V is to be as small as possible, CL must be as large as poss- 
ible. The pilot may never have heard of a lift coefficient, and he may be none 
the worse a pilot for that; but, consciously or unconsciously, he will increase 
CL by increasing the angle of attack until he decides (it matters not whether 
his decision is based on scientific knowledge, instinct or bitter experience!) that 
12 
188 MECHANICS OF FLIGHT 
Fig 6B Deck landing 
(By courtesy of the former British Aircraft Corporation, Preston) 
The Jaguar, designed by Breguet and BAC, landing on a deck. 
any further increase in the angle of attack will decrease rather than increase 
the lift; in other words, until he has come near to that stalling angle which we 
considered so fully when dealing with aerofoils. At this angle (about 15° to 20° 
in the case of an ordinary aerofoil), CL is at its maximum, and therefore V is 
a minimum. 
If the pilot, through lack of any of the three qualities mentioned above, 
exceeds this angle, then both CL and V will decrease; therefore CL . rV2 . S 
can no longer equal the weight and the aeroplane will commence to drop. For 
20 m, 50 m, or more, the vertical component of velocity will increase and the 
nose of the aeroplane will drop, therefore the pilot must beware that, when he 
does this experiment of flying as slowly as possible, he is either very near the 
12 
189 
GLIDING AND LANDING 
(a) High speed 
Angle of attack 
slightly negative 
(a) Level flight 
Angle of attack 
about 4° 
(a) Landing 
Angle of attack 
about 12° 
(d) Low speed flight with slotted wings 
Angle of attack 
20° or more 
Fig 6.6 Attitudes for level flight 
ground or at a considerable height above it. In fact, slow landings should not 
be practised between 1 and 500 m from the earth's surface, and the whole skill 
of the pilot is exercised in approaching the ground in such a manner that he 
has reached the correct condition of affairs just as he skims the surface of the 
runway, provided, of course, that he has sufficient clear run in front in which 
to pull up after landing. 
Stalling speed 
Much of what has been said applies not only to level flight, but to stalls when 
gliding, climbing or turning; for instance, when banking on a turn the lift on 
the wings must be greater than the weight, and therefore the stalling speed is 
higher than when landing. Also at height the air density r will be less, and this 
means that in order to keep CL . rV . S equal to the weight, the stalling speed 
V will be greater than at ground level. Fortunately the air speed indicator, 
which is in itself worked by the effect of the air density, will record the same 
speed when the aeroplane stalls as it did at ground level; in other words, the 
indicated stalling speeds will remain the same at all heights. 
But on high airfields, such as are found in mountainous countries, the true 
landing speed of an aeroplane will be appreciably higher than on sea-level air- 
fields; and in tropical countries the air density is decreased owing to the high 
temperatures, and the true landing speed is consequently increased. The 
taking-off speed, and the run required, are also increased in both these 
instances, and this is perhaps an even more important consideration. 
When stalling intentionally the aeroplane is pulled into a steeply climbing 
attitude and the air speed allowed to drop to practically nil until the nose sud- 
denly drops or, as frequently happens, one wing drops and the aeroplane 
commences to dive or spin. 
Before leaving the subject of stalling it might be as well to mention that 
there has always been difficulty in deciding upon an exact definition of stalling 
or stalling speed. The stall occurs because the smooth airflow over the wing 
becomes separated -- but this is a gradual process. At quite small angles of 
attack there is some turbulence near the trailing edge; as the angle increases, 
the turbulence spreads forward. What is even more important is that it also 
spreads spanwise, usually from tip to root on highly-tapered wings, and from 
root to tip on rectangular wings. If we define the stall as being the break up of 
the airflow, when did it occur? There may be buffeting of the tail plane or main 
planes, but this too may be slight and unimportant, or it may be violent. As a 
result of the change from smooth to turbulent airflow the curve of lift coeffi- 
cient reaches a maximum and then starts to fall. We defined the stalling angle 
in Chapter 3 as the angle at which the lift coefficient is a maximum. But how 
does the pilot know that it is at its maximum value? All the pilot knows is that 
if he tried to fly below a certain speed he gets into difficulties. How great the 
12 
190 MECHANICS OF FLIGHT 
difficulties depends on the type of aircraft, and the extent to which the pilot 
can overcome them depends on a lot of things, but particularly on his own 
skill. 
In fact, there are different definitions of stalling according to the point of 
view of the person who wishes to define it -- the pilot looks at it one way, the 
aerodynamicist another, and so on. What is important is that each should 
realise that it is his own definition, and that all these things do not necessarily 
occur at the same time. 
Possibilities of lower minimum speeds 
What are the possibilities of reducing this minimum velocity of flight? 
In all forms of transport, with the exception of flying, the maximum speed 
attainable is a major consideration. But in the exceptional case of flight it is 
equally important to obtain a low minimum speed as it is to obtain a high 
maximum speed. This low speed is of such importance that it is apt to be exag- 
gerated at the expense of the maximum speed. Whatever we say about 
obtaining a low landing speed, we must never forget that the chief advantage 
of flight over other means of transport depends on the high speed obtainable. 
But, provided we bear this in mind, everything must be done to reduce the 
landing (and taking off) speed, because only in this way can flying be made a 
popular and safe means of transport. The minimum speed of most light aero- 
planes is as much as 50 or 60 knots, and of some more than 100 knots. 
High lift aerofoils 
What, then, has been done, and what can yet be done to decrease minimum 
speed? If V is to be small, CL must be as large as possible. In other words, we 
must have a larger lift coefficient. So the aerofoils which give the largest 
maximum lift coefficient will give the lowest minimum speeds. Unfortunately, 
however, these aerofoils are usually those with a large drag, and so they 
seriously affect the high speed end of the range. Therefore we must turn to 
some device by which the shape of the aerofoil can be altered during flight, and 
so we naturally think of flaps and slots. 
In an earlier chapter (Fig. 3.32) we noticed the effect of various kinds of 
flaps and slots on maximum lift and speed range. The idea of variable camber 
is an old one, but it is only in recent years, when maximum speeds have 
increased so much, that the problem has become really urgent and these 
devices have come into their own. In this respect necessity has proved to be the 
mother of invention, and many and varied have been the devices which have 
been tried. It is not easy to compare the respective merits of all these types of 
191 
GLIDING AND LANDING 
slots and flaps, or combinations of slot and flap, because so many conflicting 
qualities are required. If a low speed was our only aim, the problem would be 
comparatively simple, the device giving the highest maximum lift coefficient 
being the most suitable. But what we really need is a low minimum speed and 
a high maximum speed, i.e. a good speed range. This condition means that the 
device must be such that it can be altered, or will alter automatically, from the 
position giving maximum lift (e.g. slot open or flap down), to the position of 
minimum drag (e.g. slot closed or flap neutral). Even that is not the end of our 
requirements for, having landed as slowly as possible, we must pull up quickly 
after landing. The former (slow landing) needs high lift, the latter (quick pull- 
up) needs much drag, lift being of no consequence at all. For a quick pull-up 
we really need a definite air brake which will assist the wheel brakes. Notice, 
however, that an air brake cannot reduce actual landing speed, it can only 
improve the pull-up after landing. Once we are on the ground we want to get 
rid of lift as quickly as possible to achieve minimum wheel brake effectiveness; 
hence the use of lift dumpers after touchdown. These are usually devices which 
disrupt the flow over the top of the wing, increasing drag, and decreasing lift. 
Yet another aspect of the problem, so far as landing is concerned, is the ques- 
tion of attitude, and in this respect some of the otherwise most effective types of 
slots and flaps are at a disadvantage, for they attain their maximum lift coefficient 
at a greater angle of attack than the ordinary aerofoil; this means that in order to 
make full use of them the angle of attack when landing may need to be 25°, or 
even more. But when an aeroplane with a tail-wheel type of undercarriage rests 
with its main and tail wheels on the ground, the angle of inclination of the wings 
is only about 15°. With a nose-wheel type of undercarriage the problem is if any- 
thing, worse -- as the reader will no doubt realise -- for, in order to land at an angle 
of 25°, we are faced with four possibilities all of which have serious drawbacks -- 
1. To allow the tail to touch the ground before the main wheels (Fig. 6.7a). 
This is hardly a practical proposition. 
2. To have a much higher undercarriage (Fig. 6.7b). This will cause extra 
drag and generally do more harm than good. 
3. To provide the main planes with a variable incidence gear similar to that 
which is sometimes used for tail planes (Fig. 6.7c). This involves consider- 
able mechanical difficulties. 
4. To set the wings at a much greater angle to the fuselage (Fig. 6.7d). This 
means that in normal flight the rear portion of the fuselage sticks up into 
the air at an angle which not only looks ridiculous, but which is inefficient 
from the point of view of drag. It gives the appearance of a 'broken back', 
but has sometimes been used for aircraft designed for deck landing since 
it not only gives a low landing speed, but a quick pull-up after landing. 
The only real answer lies in the design of flaps and slots which must be 
such that the effective camber of the wing can be altered so as to give 
192 MECHANICS OF FLIGHT 
maximum lift and still maintain a reasonable attitude for landing. 
Improvements in design on these lines have resulted in a real, and by no 
means negligible, reduction in landing speed (or perhaps, more correctly, 
has halted further increases in landing speed) but at the expense of ever 
more sophistication -- and ever more complication. 
Wing loading 
We assumed at an earlier stage, that the area of the wings was bound to remain 
constant, but inventors have from time to time investigated the problem of 
providing wings with variable area. 
SinceW CL. rV2.S 
W/S CL. rV2 
12 
12 
193 
GLIDING AND LANDING 
(a) Tail hitting first 
(b) Very high undercarriage 
(c) Variable incidence 
(d) Large riggers' angle of incidence 
Fig 6.7 Difficulties of landing at large angles of attack 
The fraction W/S, weight divided by wing area, is called the wing loading of 
the aeroplane. An increase in the wing area should reduce the value of W/S, 
and so also reduce the minimum velocity at which level flight is possible. 
The objections to variable area are chiefly mechanical; the operating gear means 
extra weight and so, since W will increase, it by no means follows that W/S will 
actually decrease if the wing area is increased; also, once again, the extra sophisti- 
cation means more complication, more levers for the pilot to fiddle with, more 
chances of something going wrong. Some flap systems do, however, give an increase 
in wing area during landing as they extend beyond the trailing edge of the wing. 
Apart from the question of altering the wing area during flight, the equa- 
tion W/S CL . rV 2 shows us that, other things being equal, the aeroplane 
with a low wing loading will have a lower minimum speed than one with a 
high wing loading. The so-called 'light aeroplane' may have a high wing 
loading, and therefore a high landing speed; in other words, it is not a ques- 
tion of weight, but of weight compared with wing area, that settles the 
minimum speed. The wing loading of a sailplane may be less than 100 N/m2, 
of a training aeroplane 300 to 1000 N/m2, of a fighter, bomber or airliner any- 
thing from 1500 up to 2000, 3000 or more N/m2. The modern tendency is to 
increase wing loading by reducing wing area and thus raising the maximum 
speed, and then using flaps to keep down the landing speed. The student is 
advised to work out the wing loading of existing aeroplanes and to compare 
the figures obtained with their landing speeds; in making this comparison, 
however, the student must be careful to notice the above phrase 'other things 
being equal', because the maximum lift coefficient of the aerofoil used also 
affects the result. An old example of high wing loading, very high for that 
time, was the 1977 N/m2 of the S.6b Schneider Trophy racing seaplane; the 
corresponding figure for fighters like the 'Spitfire' and 'Hurricane' at the begin- 
ning of the Second World War was 1187 N/m2, and for the German fighter, 
Messerschmitt 109, 1522 N/m2. Modern figures may be considerably higher 
than these; the Concorde was about 4800 N/m2. 
Method of finding minimum landing speed 
It is easy to work out simple problems on minimum or landing speeds by using 
the now familiar formula -- 
Weight Lift CL. rV2.S 
If we denote the maximum value of the lift coefficient by CL max, and the 
landing speed by VL, then our formula becomes 
W CL.max rV2.S 
12 
12 
12 
194 MECHANICS OF FLIGHT 
Consider this problem -- 
Find the wing area required for an aeroplane of mass 1500 kg, if the 
minimum landing speed is to be 35 knots (65 km/h) and the maximum value 
of the lift coefficient for the aerofoil used is 1.2 (assume the air density to be 
1.225 kg/m3). 
Data:W 14715N 
r 1.22 kg/m3 
VL  65km/h 18m/s 
CLmax 1.2 
S ? 
So14715 1.2  
1.225 18 18 S 
 S 62m2approx 
This is rather a large wing area for an aeroplane of this weight, and it is 
doubtful whether the structure involved would not make the total weight 
greater than 14 715 N, in which case, of course, the landing speed would be 
above 35 knots. 
Suppose we could use a flapped wing with a maximum lift coefficient of 1.8 
instead of 1.2, then, neglecting any small increase in weight, the necessary 
wing area to produce the same landing speed would be -- 
(1.2/1.8) 62 41 m2 approx 
It would certainly be much easier to design a wing structure of this size so as 
to conform to a total weight of 14 715 N and, further, the reduced wing area 
would enable a much greater maximum speed to be obtained. 
As another problem, let us compare the minimum landing speeds of the fol- 
lowing -- 
(a) A sailplane of wing loading 100 N/m2. 
(b) A training machine of wing loading 400 N/m2. 
(c) A fighter of wing loading 1500 N/m2. 
(d) The S.6b of wing loading about 2000 N/m2. 
(e) An airliner of wing loading 3000 N/m2. 
12 
195 
GLIDING AND LANDING 
Supposing other things to be equal, e.g. taking r as 1.225 kg/m3, and assuming 
each machine is fitted with an aerofoil section having a maximum lift coeffi- 
cient of 1.12, then -- 
(a) Wing loading W/S 100 CL max rVL2 
1.12 
1.225 VL2 
VL2 (100 2)/(1.12 1.225) 146 
VL 12m/s, i.e. 23knots or43km/h 
Similarly for 
(b) Landing speed 47 knots (87 km/h) 
(c) 91 knots (169 km/h) 
(d) 106 knots (195 km/h) 
(e) ? knots (? km/h). Reader, work it out. 
Such is the type of problem which confronts the designer of an aeroplane in 
the very early stages, when, by a process of calculations, he has to decide such 
important items as the wing area, the type of aerofoil, and the landing speed. 
It will now be obvious that in order to settle these he must know the weight -- 
the weight of an aeroplane which he has not yet commenced to design! Here 
comes the first great guess; but it is a guess based on experience, and often 
proves remarkably accurate. A decision as to landing speed and as to the type 
of aerofoil will then decide the wing area, on which the whole lay-out of the 
aeroplane depends, so it will be seen how important is this question of landing 
speed and its influence on the whole design of the finished aeroplane. 
Landing speeds and the future 
So far as landing speed is concerned, we are reaching an interesting stage in 
the history of aviation. Wing loadings are still going up; they went up slowly 
but surely for the first thirty years of flight, and rather less slowly, but more 
surely, during the Second World War -- and since. There is at the moment no 
sign of any halt in this progress -- for progress it certainly is. We must assume, 
therefore, that wing loadings will go still farther. 
During this time, slots and flaps, and then better flaps, have been invented, 
and the maximum value of CL has gone up from just over 1 to about 3, or even 
4, for a good modern aerofoil section with slotted flaps and slots extending 
along 60 per cent of the wing span. When the maximum CL was 1.22 (RAF 
12 
12 
196 MECHANICS OF FLIGHT 
15), a wing loading of 500 N/m2 was considered high; but with a CL max of 
3, even 5000 N/m2 has already been exceeded. Now a CL max of 1.22 and W/S 
of 500 gives a landing speed of about 50 knots (93 km/h) whereas a CL max 
of 3 and W/S of 5000 gives a landing speed of about 102 knots (188 km/h). 
So we have accepted a considerably higher landing speed -- but how long 
can this go on? The increase in wing loading has already had a greater effect 
than the increase in maximum lift coefficient, but so far we have discovered 
better and better flaps. Now, however, it would seem that there is not much 
hope of any further great improvement in flaps -- so what of the future? The 
first thing we must do is clear enough -- flaps, and slots too, must extend along 
the whole span of the wing, perhaps also under the fuselage; this has already 
been done in some types of aircraft, sometimes by arranging that the ailerons 
act also as flaps, therefore known as 'flaperons' or by dispensing with the 
ailerons altogether and adopting an alternative form of lateral control, such as 
spoilers -- this will be discussed later, or by differential movement of the tail 
surfaces, thus known as 'tailerons'. 
Such methods might give us another 40 per cent increase in maximum lift 
coefficient and a landing speed of about 86 knots (158 km/h) for a wing 
loading of 5000 N/m2. So what are the prospects for the future? Well, there has 
been no shortage of ideas, and the patent offices of the world contain hundreds 
of examples, ranging from the good to the impractical or ill-conceived. 
Amongst the good ideas is that of using high pressure air bled from the engine 
compressor to help induce attached flow over the flaps (blown flaps) at large 
deflections, or even to produce a downward curtain of air which can turn the 
main airflow through extremely large angles: the so-called jet flap. Such 
devices, though effective, are however complex and heavy, and have generally 
only been used for specialised aircraft, usually military. An example of an 
apparently promising idea that never went into general use is the Custer 
channel wing shown in Fig. 6.8. The idea was quite simple; the propellers drew 
air over the curved wing sections, thereby allowing the flow to remain 
attached at high angles of attack. However, there are two main problems with 
most of such ideas. Firstly the lifting surface also needs to have a good lift to 
drag ratio at high speed, and secondly, as the minimum speed of the aircraft 
decreases, it becomes more and more difficult to provide adequate stability 
and control by conventional means. Other approaches to providing lift at low 
or even zero speed are dealt with below. 
197 
GLIDING AND LANDING 
Fig 6.8 The idea of the 'Custer' channel wing 
The engines -- with pusher propellers -- were suspended in the channels 
with the ailerons just outboard of the channels. 
Short and vertical landing and take-off 
The idea of low landing speeds or even vertical landing was a much sought- 
after goal even in the earliest days of flying. In fact, until the twentieth century, 
the only manned flights were made in vertical take-off devices: balloons and 
airships. Over the years, there has been considerable research into both vertical 
and short take-off aircraft, and one firm outcome has been the coining of two 
acronyms, VTOL for Vertical Take-off and Landing, and STOL for Short 
Take-off and Landing. To this has been added some hybrids like STOVL, 
Short Take-off and Vertical Landing. In the following sections, some of the 
more successful or promising types are described. 
The gyroplane 
Perhaps the first really practical achievement in this direction was the Cierva 
Autogiro in 1923 The Autogiro was not a helicopter, but a gyroplane, and a 
gyroplane differs from a helicopter in one vital particular in that, whereas in 
a helicopter the wings or blades are rotated by the power of the main engine, 
in a gyroplane the rotating wings are not driven except by the action of the air 
upon them, and this in turn is caused by the forward or downward air speed 
of the aircraft. Thus forward speed is necessary in a gyroplane, just as it is in 
a conventional aeroplane and, as in the latter, it is provided by the thrust of an 
ordinary engine and propeller. A modern gyroplane is shown in Fig. 6C (top). 
Space does not permit a full consideration of the principles underlying this 
very interesting flying machine, and it must suffice to say that the secret lies in 
the fact that by a suitable inclination backwards of the axis the wings rotate 
automatically in such a way that even when the forward speed of the aircraft 
is far lower than the stalling speed of a conventional aeroplane the rotating 
wings are still striking the air at a considerable velocity, and can thus provide 
sufficient lift to keep the aircraft in the air. In this way the forward speed can 
be reduced to 5 or 10 knots which, in a slight head wind, means a ground 
speed of practically nil. 
When the Cierva Autogiro first appeared it succeeded in achieving, in one 
fell swoop, a landing speed such as the experimenters of all nations had con- 
sidered to be a dream of the distant future. Moreover later developments 
resulted, in 1935, in a 'jump start', or true vertical take-off, achieved by 
rotating the wings on the ground (by engine power), and then suddenly 
increasing the pitch, or angle of attack of the blades. 
The gyroplane, sometimes called an autogyro (the spelling Autogiro was a 
trade name), still has its advocates, and still exists in various forms, including 
very light and simple single-seaters (Fig. 6C). 
198 MECHANICS OF FLIGHT 
199 
GLIDING AND LANDING 
Fig 6C STOL 
Top: The autogyro after almost disappearing as an historical curiosity has 
made a comeback in the form of a popular ultralight. 
Bottom: The de Havilland Canada Dash-7, original mainstay of the London 
City (STOL) Airport. The four propellers provided a' high-energy airflow 
over much of the wing. 
(Photo by courtesy of Terry Shwetz, de Havilland Canada.) 
200 MECHANICS OF FLIGHT 
The helicopter 
In a true helicopter in normal flight, the upward thrust of the revolving blades 
must be equal to the weight; forward motion is produced by inclining the 
effective axis of the rotor forward which normally entails tilting the nose of 
the helicopter down. The actual means by which this is achieved is rather com- 
plicated and involves altering the cyclic variations in rotor blade incidence. 
Owing to the reaction of the torque of the lifting blades the whole aircraft will 
try to rotate in the opposite direction, this resulting in a tendency to yaw 
which corresponds to the rolling tendency due to the propeller on a fixed-wing 
aircraft. The yawing tendency can be counteracted either by an auxiliary pro- 
peller or by a jet reaction system at the tail; this can also be used to provide 
directional control and to save the necessity of having a rudder (Fig. 6D). 
The development of successful helicopters has involved the solution of many 
other practical problems. The blade going into the wind (the wind produced by 
the motion of the aircraft) gets more lift, and drag, than the blade going down 
wind. This happens whenever the machine moves in any direction, forwards, 
backwards or sideways; but it becomes an even more serious problem when 
moving at high speeds because the tip portions of the blade going into the wind 
meet compressibility problems before the aircraft itself is moving anywhere near 
the speed of sound; this fact has so far limited the speed of helicopters to some- 
thing like 200 knots (370 km/h). The helicopter has other failings too, vibration is 
apt to be excessive, as is the noise when compared with aircraft of similar power. 
Attempts to solve these and other problems have resulted in wings that 
must not only rotate, but also have cyclically and collectively variable inci- 
dence, hinges to give variable dihedral (resulting in a kind of flapping motion 
of the blades), drag hinges to allow the blades to bend backwards, and some- 
times, a tilting axes of rotation. Then there are the auxiliary propellers at the 
tail, or jets, some have had jets too at the wing tips to rotate the blades, some 
have had more than one set of rotating wings (like contra-rotating propellers), 
and there have been many other ingenious devices, all helping to some extent 
to solve the problems, but all contributing to the complication and weight of 
an already complicated type of aircraft. 
Recent developments have included the use of so-called 'rigid' rotors, where 
the flapping and drag hinges are replaced by flexures. This has reduced the 
mechanical complexity, and also the weight of the rotor head. Another devel- 
opment has been the shrouding of the tail rotor in a kind of fin. This results in 
less drag and reduces the possibility of accidental contact with the tail rotor. A 
further development has been the replacement of the tail rotor with a variable 
air jet at the rear to perform the same function. This type, known as a 
NOTAR, (standing for No Tail Rotor) is much quieter than the conventional 
helicopter, and also avoids the possibility of damage to or from the tail rotor. 
The main limitation of a conventional helicopter remains its low maximum 
speed. One of the reasons for this is that in order to generate lift, a significant 
201 
GLIDING AND LANDING 
Fig 6D VTOL -- helicopters 
Top: The tiny but popular Robinson R-22, with piston engine and rubber 
belt drive. Flying it feels like trying to ride a monocycle at first. 
Bottom: At the other extreme, the massive Russian Mil Mi-26 TM capable 
of lifting a load of 196 000 newtons (20 tonnes). 
part of the retreating blades must be going faster than the relative air speed 
past the helicopter. This means that the advancing ones will be going more 
than twice as fast as the aircraft, and will therefore go supersonic when the air- 
craft is still flying at significantly less that half the speed of sound. Several 
solutions have been proposed and even developed. One of these is the so-called 
'compound' helicopter. This has the normal features of a conventional heli- 
copter but also has small wings and a separate engine or engines to provide 
forward thrust directly. At high speed, the wings provide most of the lift, 
allowing the rotor to be rotated relatively slowly or even be feathered. A 
number of examples have been built, but so far it remains something of a 
rarity. A possible alternative is provided by development of the coaxial rotor 
helicopter which has two contra-rotating rotors mounted on the same shaft or 
sometimes two close shafts with intermeshing rotors. On this arrangement, it 
is possible to arrange for the lift to be generated primarily by the advancing 
blades of the rotors, the retreating blades providing little or no lift. Since they 
do not have to provide lift, the retreating blades can be feathered and do not 
need to go faster than the relative flow speed past the aircraft. This of course 
means that that the advancing blade can be going correspondingly slowly. 
Many practical examples of coaxial rotor helicopters have been manufactured 
and they are not uncommon, particularly in military applications. They have 
the added advantage that no tail rotor is required. Their disadvantage lies in 
the extreme complexity of the rotor head, and the problems caused by inter- 
secting rotor wakes. As yet, the potential of the coaxial rotor for very high 
speed flight has not yet been realised on production examples. 
Jet lift 
Until recently, the only serious contenders to the helicopter have been jet lift and 
thrust vectoring aircraft, and the only really successful one was the Harrier, 
(known as the AV-8 in the USA). The Harrier (Fig. 6G, later) uses downward 
deflection of the engine to produce a lifting thrust until sufficient forward speed 
has been obtained for the wings to take over the job of lifting. The engine outlet 
nozzles, two from the hot exhaust and two from the compressor, can be 'vec- 
tored' (varied in outlet angle) from vertical or even slightly forward, to horizontal 
in order to obtain the desired balance between lift and forward thrust. The 
thorny problem of providing stability and control at low speed is solved by using 
four 'puffer' jets of compressed air bled from the engine. These are situated at the 
nose, the tail and both wing tips. Like the helicopter, this aircraft can be flown 
backwards forwards and sideways. It can also hover and land and take off ver- 
tically. Although it is capable of vertical take-off, it is more economical in terms 
of fuel burn for the aircraft to make a short horizontal take-off, with the engines 
set at an intermediate angle so as to provide thrust and some lift. It may there- 
fore be classified as V/STOL, meaning that it can use vertical and short take-off. 
202 MECHANICS OF FLIGHT 
During the cold war, the Soviet Union developed a rival to the Harrier, the 
Yakovlev Yak-36. This aircraft used an alternative method of jet lift in that it 
employed separate engines for lift instead of just relying on thrust vectoring. 
For many years, however, the Harrier was the only really practical jet lift air- 
craft in service anywhere, but after much political indecision and argument, 
the Lockheed Martin F-35 JSF (Joint Strike Fighter) finally emerged. Some 
variants of this have similar V/STOL capabilities to the Harrier, and a much 
higher top speed. Thrust vectoring is used, but in addition, a fan driven by the 
engine provides part of the lift. 
Other short and vertical take-off aircraft 
As with high-lift devices, there have been very many ideas for vertical or short 
take-off aircraft. Ignoring the untried or less promising examples, we are left 
with three main approaches to the problem. These are -- 
(a) Tilting the whole aircraft, as shown in Fig. 6E (overleaf). A small number 
of successful experimental aircraft were built, but the practical problems 
(such as seeing where you are going on landing) remained too daunting for 
further development. 
(b) Tilting the engines and wings for take-off and landing, whilst leaving the 
main body of the aircraft horizontal. Several experimental aircraft have 
been flown, but no production types have been forthcoming. 
(c) Tilting the rotors/propellers or the engines and rotors/propellers. Again, 
many experimental aircraft of this type have been flown, but it was only 
after much political indecision and a number of serious technical set-backs 
that the go-ahead was finally given for series production of the Boeing-Bell 
V 22 Osprey tilt-rotor aircraft (Fig. 6F, overleaf). This aircraft combines 
the features of conventional aircraft and helicopters. In high speed flight, 
the rotors are tilted forward and become large diameter propellers, so the 
aircraft does not suffer the same speed limitations as a conventional heli- 
copter. The cost and complexity are however high. Another aircraft using 
this principle is the smaller Bell/Augusta BA609. 
Surface skimming vehicles 
The hovercraft can reasonably be counted as a type of aeroplane, as it does fly, 
albeit just above the ground. The hovercraft is lifted above the ground or 
water surface by means of a fan, which produces a raised pressure under the 
vehicle. Leakage of the air from the underside is restricted by a peripheral 
203 
GLIDING AND LANDING 
204 MECHANICS OF FLIGHT 
Fig 6E VTOL 
(By courtesy of the General Dynamics Corporation, USA) 
Pogo aircraft built for US Navy; after vertical take-off it could level off and 
fly horizontally; for landing the pilot pointed the nose straight up, and 
backed down tail first onto small wheels at trailing edges of wings and 
fins. 
'curtain' of high speed air, normally supplemented by a flexible 'skirt'. At one 
time, the hovercraft was seen as a major new type of transport vehicle, and for 
many years hovercraft operated a ferry service across the English Channel. In 
fine weather this provided a much faster alternative to the conventional ferries. 
However, the hovercraft were expensive to run and maintain. Also they could 
not be operated in very heavy seas, and were prone to generate nausea 
amongst the passengers even in moderate seas. Nowadays hovercraft are 
mostly used for very specialised operations, for example in swampy areas, and 
for recreational and competition use. For ferry duties, they have been largely 
superseded by various types of catamaran and hydrofoil. 
Another type of vehicle that flies just above the surface is the surface 
skimmer or ekranoplane. These aircraft resemble a conventional aircraft, but 
by flying just above the surface, take advantage of the 'ground effect' which 
greatly reduces the wing downwash, and consequently reduces the accompa- 
nying trailing vortex drag. Some extremely large and very fast aircraft of this 
type were under development in the old Soviet Union just before its collapse, 
but subsequent economic difficulties brought further development to a virtual 
standstill. The main disadvantages of the ekranoplane are the problems of 
205 
GLIDING AND LANDING 
Fig 6F Convertiplane 
(By courtesy of Bell Helicopter Textron) 
The Boeing-Bell V-22 Osprey. Capable of VTOL and VSTOL. The engines 
can be rotated to provide conventional forward flight after take-off. 
ensuring the correct ground clearance at all times, and the very large amount 
of engine power needed to get the aircraft to lift off from the water. Several 
large turbojets were needed on the larger experimental aircraft, and once lift- 
off had been achieved, most of them became redundant for the rest of the 
journey. 
The complete approach and landing 
During the few years preceding the Second World War, a new technique in 
flying was developed. In this book we are not concerned with the art of flying 
as such, but we are very much concerned with the alteration of technique 
because it was brought about by progress in the science of flight accompanied 
by the corresponding changes in aeroplane design. To the outward eye the 
main change was that the monoplane, rather suddenly, took precedence over 
the biplane. Less obvious, perhaps but more important, was the increase in 
wing loadings -- which incidentally was itself the reason behind the ascendancy 
of the monoplane. With increase in wing loading came higher landing speed, 
206 MECHANICS OF FLIGHT 
Fig 6G V/STOL 
The Harrier is capable of vertical take-off, very short take-off, and 
conventional take-off using its vectored-thrust Pegasus turbofan engine; it 
can also hover and fly sideways or backwards. Control at low speed is by 
reaction jet nozzles situated at the wing-tips and either end of the 
fuselage. 
(Photo courtesy of Nigel Cogger) 
207 
GLIDING AND LANDING 
Fig 6H VTOL -- another way 
After a century of neglect, the hot-air balloon has made a major 
comeback. This one is tethered and is being used for pilot training. The 
wicker basket provides good impact absorption on landing. 
higher landing speed meant that flaps -- once a luxury -- became a necessity, 
and flaps, in their turn, were largely responsible for the new technique, 
especially in so far as it affects the approach and landing. 
A pilot, when approaching a landing ground, may find that he is either 
undershooting or overshooting. If he is undershooting there is little that he can 
do (assuming, of course, that he is already gliding at the best angle) except use 
his engine power to flatten his glide. In the old days such a method was con- 
sidered bad flying; if the engine was functioning satisfactorily, it showed lack 
of judgment; if the engine was out of action -- that is to say in the case of a 
forced landing -- it could not be done. Nowadays the engine-assisted approach, 
as it is called, is a standard method of approaching to land. It might almost be 
said that on the most modern machines the glide approach is only used as 
practice for a forced landing. 
In the anxiety to avoid undershooting there is a natural tendency to over- 
shoot, especially since it would seem to be easy to lose any unnecessary height. 
In practice it is not quite so easy. In older types of aircraft the following methods 
were available as means of losing height in the event of overshooting -- 
(a) Sideslipping. 
(b) Prolonging the glide by S-turns. 
(c) Putting the nose down and gliding fast. 
(d) Holding the nose up and gliding slowly. 
The objections to the last two have already been explained; the first two 
methods, on the other hand, were successfully employed for very many years. 
Then came the modern type of aircraft -- its superior streamlining gave it a 
very flat gliding angle, so flat that even a slight degree of overshooting caused 
it to float much too far before landing. But that was not all -- it did not like 
sideslipping (reasons for this will be given later), and with its very flat angle of 
glide the S-turn did not result in sufficient loss of height. 
Necessity may be the mother of invention, but in this little bit of aviation 
history the invention existed before the necessity arose; flaps had been in use 
for many years, but they had not really been fully applied to their modern pur- 
poses. These purposes can best be described by considering the process of 
approaching and landing a light private aircraft by the old-fashioned glide 
approach technique. This typically consists of five separate phases (Fig. 6.9) -- 
the glide, the flattening-out, the float or hold-off, the landing, and the pull-up. 
In each and all of these flaps have their part to play. Let us consider them in 
turn. 
First, then, let it be understood that the last 150 m or so of the glide should 
be straight, without any slipping or turning to one side or the other. This can 
only be done if the pilot has means of controlling the gliding angle relative to 
the earth without unduly raising or lowering the air speed. Flaps can give him 
208 MECHANICS OF FLIGHT 
the means to do this, at any rate over a limited range of gliding angles. As the 
flaps are lowered both lift and drag are increased. The increase in lift tends to 
flatten the gliding angle and to make it possible to glide at a slower air speed 
without approaching dangerously near to the stall. The increase in drag tends 
to steepen the gliding angle, and gliding attitude, of the aeroplane for the same 
air speed. The net effect depends on whether lift or drag has the greater pro- 
portional increase, i.e. on whether the L/D ratio is raised or lowered, and that 
in turn depends on how much the flaps are lowered and on the type of flap. 
So much then for the actual glide -- we can sum it up by saying that flaps 
give us at least some control over the gliding angle (Fig. 6I, overleaf). 
Next comes the process of flattening out; this involves a change of direction, 
and so an acceleration, and force, towards the centre of the curved path. This 
force must be provided by the wings which must therefore have more speed 
and more angle, so in effect the stalling speed is higher. Now the steeper the 
original glide, the greater the change in flight path involved, and so the more 
speed must there be in hand for flattening out. All this is very annoying -- it 
means that the more steeply we glide, the faster must we glide; just what we 
were trying to avoid. The solution is to use engine power, as we shall consider 
later. 
After flattening out, we must lose any excess speed -- this may be called the 
float or hold-off. In this the drag of flaps or air brakes play their part, as do 
the wings themselves as they are brought to the angle for actual landing. 
After the float comes the landing (Fig. 6J, overleaf). This, in a sense, is momen- 
tary only but the landing speed is of the utmost importance because it settles both 
the gliding speed and the distance to pull up after landing. The problem of 
landing speed has already been fully discussed, but it must be emphasised -- 
209 
GLIDING AND LANDING 
Glide path 
Straight line 
GLIDE 
Depends on 
L/D ratio 
Curved path 
FLATTENING 
OUT 
Excess speed 
needed for 
change of 
direction 
Straight line 
descending 
slightly 
FLOAT 
Reduced 
by drag 
Straight line 
parallel to 
ground 
PULL-UP 
Reduced by 
air drag and 
wheel brakes 
70 knots 60 knots 
At rest 
Landing reduced by lift
80 knots 
80 knots 
Fig 6.9 The approach and landing 
Air speeds shown are approximate only, but indicate at what parts of the 
approach and landing there is a loss of air speed. 
because it is so often misunderstood -- that drag, whether caused by flaps or any- 
thing else, cannot reduce landing speed; that is entirely a question of lift. 
After the landing, the pull-up. This at least is easy to understand; what we 
need for a quick pull-up is drag -- wheel brakes and air brakes -- the more the 
better, provided the aircraft can stand it and does not tip on its nose. In 
addition to actual air brakes, some types of flap, when fully lowered, give good 
braking effect, and so do the wings at their angle of 16° or so with a tail-wheel 
type of undercarriage. The lack of air drag during the landing run is one of the 
few disadvantages of the nose-wheel type -- an effective substitute, sometimes 
used, is a tail parachute (Fig. 6K, overleaf), and, perhaps most effective of all, 
reversible pitch propellers or reversed thrusts of jets. The air-braking effect is 
greatest at the beginning of the landing run, the wheel-braking later when it 
can more safely be used. The problem of brakes is a straightforward one of 
mechanics, but apart from the question of coefficient of friction between 
wheels and ground, and the serious danger of 'aquaplaning' when there is 
water on the runway, there are some aspects of brakes which are peculiar to 
aircraft. For instance, the centre of gravity is high above the wheels, though 
not so much with jets as with propellers; it is also, with a tail-wheel type of 
undercarriage, only a short distance behind the wheels, and so, if the brakes 
are applied violently there is an immediate tendency to go over on to the nose. 
Another difficulty is that if a tail-wheel aeroplane starts to swing, the centre of 
gravity, being behind the wheels, will cause the swing to increase. This may be 
checked by the differential action of the brakes, but it is interesting to note that 
210 MECHANICS OF FLIGHT 
Fig 6I Ready for landing 
The huge Antonov AN-124 with Fowler flaps and leading edge slats 
extended, and undercarriage lowered, showing the ten pairs of main 
wheels. 
the tricycle or nose-wheel undercarriage (Figs 6J, 6K and others) can remove 
the cause of this and other troubles. When this type of undercarriage is used, 
as it is almost universally on modern aircraft, the centre of gravity is in front 
of the main wheels and there is no tendency to swing, and at the same time the 
aircraft is prevented from going on to its nose by the front wheel. The effect 
on braking, and consequent shorter pull-up has to be seen -- or, better still, 
tried -- to be believed. And there are other advantages too. 
So much for the glide approach and landing; for forced landings it is the 
only way. For approaching over high obstacles at the edge of an airfield it may 
also come in useful. In all other circumstances, with modern types of aircraft, 
the engine-assisted approach is better, so let us sum up the reasons as to why 
it is preferred -- 
1. By slight adjustments of the throttle the path of glide can be flattened or 
steepened at will. 
2. The gliding path is flatter, so there is less change of path in flattening out, 
less acceleration, less extra lift required, less increase in stalling speed, and 
thus less excess speed is needed, and the glide can safely be made more 
slowly. 
3. In propeller-driven aircraft the extra speed of the slipstream over elevators 
and rudder makes these controls more effective -- their effectiveness 
enables us to counteract wind gradient and turbulence effects near the 
ground. 
4. Since there is less excess speed to be lost, the float is reduced. 
211 
GLIDING AND LANDING 
Fig 6J Landing 
A BAe 146 about to touch down, Fowler flaps extended and rear air-brake 
doors open. 
5. An engine, already running, will respond more readily to the throttle if it 
is found necessary to make another circuit before landing. 
6. For all the reasons already given less judgment is required -- the whole 
process is easier. 
Well, all that sounds pretty convincing, and not only is it perfectly sound rea- 
soning but it is amply confirmed by experience. 
As was mentioned in Chapter 3 many modern types of aircraft are literally 
'flown onto the ground' at speeds well above the stalling speed; this is where real 
lift dumpers come into their own -- these are larger than normal air brakes or 
spoilers, and cannot be operated unless the undercarriage is locked down, and the 
aircraft is bearing on the wheels and the engines throttled back -- they 'kill' the 
lift, keep the aircraft on the ground and make the wheel brakes more effective. 
They are essentially for use after landing, and are a common feature on gliders. 
Effect of flaps on trim 
The lowering or raising of flaps affects the airflow not only over the lower 
surface of the wing, but also over the upper surface -- probably the more 
212 MECHANICS OF FLIGHT 
Fig 6K Pulling up after landing 
Eurofighter Typhoon using an arrester parachute to reduce the landing run. 
important effect -- and in front of the wing and behind the wing (Fig. 6.10). 
The airflow in turn affects the pressure distribution and the forces and 
moments on the wing and on the tail plane. It is hardly surprising, therefore, 
that the trim may be affected, but it may seem curious that the lowering of the 
flap sometimes tends towards nose-heaviness, sometimes tail-heaviness. 
Consider the top surface of the wing. When the flap is lowered, the air flows 
faster over the top, especially near the leading edge. There will be greater 
suction here and the chances are that the centre of pressure on the top surface 
will move forward, thus tending towards tail-heaviness. 
The downwash behind the wing will be large; and if the tail plane is so situ- 
ated as to receive the full benefit of this downwash, there will be a downward 
force on the tail plane, tending towards tail-heaviness. 
In a low-wing aircraft the low position of the drag on the flap, especially 
when fully lowered, will tend towards nose-heaviness. On a high wing aircraft 
the drag, being high, may tend towards tail-heaviness. 
The net effect on the pitching moment depends entirely on the type of flap 
or slots used, on how much they are lowered, and on the situation of the tail 
plane. Slotted flaps, and flaps that move backwards so increasing the rear 
portion of the wing area, will nearly always cause a nose-down moment which 
sometimes has to be counteracted by leading edge slots and flaps. 
Sometimes, too, the change of trim is in one direction for the first part of 
the lowering of the flap, usually tail-heavy; and in the other direction, nose- 
heavy, when full flap is lowered. In some aircraft the effects, whether by design 
or good luck, so cancel each other that there is little or no change of trim, and 
no one is more pleased than the pilot. 
It should be noted that the technique of landing a modern high performance 
aircraft, be it military or civilian, is nothing like the straightforward seat-of- 
213 
GLIDING AND LANDING 
Fig 6.10 Flow over wing and tail -- flaps up and flaps down 
the-pants procedure described earlier for the case of a light private aircraft. 
For such modern aircraft, the speed, height, angle of descent and a host of 
other factors such as the flap and power setting must be correct within very 
close limits as the aircraft crosses the airfield threshold. If not, the pilot must 
abort the approach and try again. Landing a modern airliner manually 
requires a great deal of skill and concentration, and the majority of landings 
are nowadays made under automatic control with the pilot merely keeping a 
watchful eye, and being ready to take over at any instant in the event of a 
system malfunction. In order to maintain their skill (and their licence) pilots 
are, however, required to make a certain proportion of landings under manual 
control. It would be virtually impossible to land machines such as the Space 
Shuttle without some form of computer assistance. 
Can you answer these? 
1. If, when an aeroplane is gliding at its minimum angle of glide, the pilot 
attempts to glide farther by holding the nose of the aeroplane up, what 
will be the result, and why? 
2. Discuss the effect of flaps on the gliding angle. 
3. How does the load carried in an aeroplane affect the gliding angle and 
gliding speed? 
4. Does the flattest glide give the longest time in the air? If not, why not? 
5. Does (a) the stalling speed, (b) the stalling angle, change with height? 
6. What are the advantages of the engine-assisted approach? 
7. Why may the lowering of flaps affect the trim of an aeroplane? 
8. You are flying an aeroplane well out to sea when the engine fails; there is 
a good airfield just on the coast and it is touch and go whether you can 
reach it; you have disposable load on board, luggage, bombs, and fuel; 
should you jettison your load, and if so when, and what should be your 
tactics in an endeavour to reach the airfield? (Note. There is more in this 
question than one might at first think, e.g. your tactics should be different 
for different wind conditions, so consider conditions of no wind, head 
winds, and tail winds; if you have surplus speed, what can you do with it?; 
can you reduce your drag?; should you use flaps?; at what speed should 
you fly?; should you jettison your load and, if so, when?) 
For solutions see Appendix 5. 
Numerical examples on gliding and landing will be found in Appendix 3. 
214 MECHANICS OF FLIGHT 
It may seem rather illogical that we should first consider level flight, then gliding 
and landing, and now the take-off, climb and general performance of the aero- 
plane. But there is method in our madness. Level flight is, as it were, the standard 
condition of flight with which all other manoeuvres are compared. Gliding, too, 
involves simple fundamental principles, in some ways more elementary than 
those of level flight. Landing we have used to illustrate the principles of flight at 
low speeds. All these have followed quite naturally one on the other, but the 
take-off is a problem on its own. 
Taking-off 
The pilot needs skill and practice before he can be sure of making a good take- 
off, one of the main problems being to keep the aircraft on a straight and narrow 
path. This difficulty applies mainly to propeller-driven aircraft, and has already 
been discussed in Chapter 4. In general, it may be said that the object during the 
take-off is to obtain sufficient lift to support the weight with the least possible 
run along the ground. In order to obtain this result the angle of attack is kept 
small during the first part of the run so as to reduce the drag; then, when the 
speed has reached the minimum speed of flight, if the tail is lowered and the 
wings brought to about 15° angle of attack, the aeroplane will be capable of 
flight. Although by this method the aeroplane probably leaves the ground with 
the least possible run, it is apt to be dangerous because, once having left the 
ground, any attempt to climb by further increase of angle will result in stalling 
and dropping back on to the ground. Therefore it is necessary to allow the speed 
to increase beyond the stalling speed before 'pulling-off', and sometimes the 
aeroplane is allowed to continue to run in the tail-up position until it takes off of 
its own accord (Fig. 7A, overleaf). 
The process of taking-off is largely influenced by such things as the runway 
surface, and although of extreme interest, the subject is too complex to be 
Performance 
CHAPTER7 
within the scope of this book. In order to reduce the length of run, and 
increase the angle of climb after leaving the ground -- so as to clear obstacles 
on the outskirts of the airfield -- the take-off will, when possible, be made 
against the wind. Other aids to taking-off are slots, flaps or any other devices 
which increase the lift without unduly increasing the drag, and, essential in 
propeller-driven high-speed aircraft, the variable-pitch propeller. 
The question as to whether or not flaps should be used for taking-off 
depends upon whether the increased lift of the flap, with the resulting decrease 
in taking-off speed, makes up for the lower acceleration caused by the 
increased drag of the flap. But the problem is a little more complicated than 
that, because while we wish to avoid drag throughout all the take-off run, we 
only really need the extra lift at the end, when we are ready to take off. No 
doubt we could get off most quickly by a sudden application of flap at this 
stage, but such a method would certainly be dangerous. The lift type of flap 
helps the take-off considerably, other types may have some beneficial effect if 
used at a moderate angle, and in practice some degree of flap is nearly always 
used for take-off in modern high-speed types of aircraft if only because it 
reduces the otherwise very high take-off speed with consequent wear of tyres. 
Some interesting problems arise in connection with the take-off. Modern 
undercarriages may tuck away nicely during flight, but when lowered they are 
less streamlined than a fixed undercarriage and their drag may hamper the 
take-off quite considerably; the lower undercarriage that can be used with jets 
is a great advantage in this respect. Again, just as landing speeds go up with 
high wing loading, so do take-off speeds, and the length of run needed to 
attain such speeds is liable to become excessive. The idea of catapulting is an 
old one but its use has mostly been restricted to carrier-borne aircraft. The 
assistance of rockets gives much the same effect as catapulting, but has rarely 
been used. Refuelling in the air does not sound like a form of assisted take-off, 
but it does present possibilities in that an aircraft can be taken off lightly 
loaded as regards fuel. 
216 MECHANICS OF FLIGHT 
Fig 7A Taking-off 
The Myasischev M-55 high-altitude aircraft for surveillance and geophysics 
research. 
Finally, although we have considered STOL and VTOL in their effect on 
landing, we must not forget that they are at least as important for take-off. 
Climbing 
During level flight the power of the engine must produce, via the propeller, jet 
or rocket, a thrust equal to the drag of the aeroplane at that particular speed 
of flight. If now the engine has some reserve of power in hand, and if the 
throttle is further opened, either -- 
(a) The pilot can put the nose down slightly, and maintain level flight at an 
increased speed and decreased angle of attack, or 
(b) The aeroplane will commence to climb (Fig. 7B). 
A consideration of the forces which act upon an aeroplane during a climb is 
interesting, but slightly more complicated than the other cases which we have 
considered. 
217 
PERFORMANCE 
Fig 7B Climbing 
An Airbus A-330 using flaps to demonstrate its steep climb capability. 
Assuming that the path actually travelled by the aeroplane is in the same 
direction as the thrust, then the forces will be as shown in Fig. 7.1. If a is the 
angle of climb, and if we resolve the forces parallel and at right angles to the 
direction of flight, we obtain two equations -- 
(1)T D Wsina (2)L Wcosa 
Translated into non-mathematical language, the first of these equations tells us 
that during a climb the thrust needed is greater than the drag and increases 
with the steepness of the climb. This is what we would expect. If a vertical 
climb were possible, a would be 90° and therefore sin a would be 1, so the first 
equation would become T D W, which is obviously true because in such 
an extreme case the thrust would have the opposition of both the weight and 
the drag. Similarly if a 0° (i.e. if there is no climb), sin a 0. Therefore W 
sin a 0. Therefore T D, the condition which we have already established 
for straight and level flight. 
Power curves -- propeller propulsion 
An interesting and more practical way of approaching the climbing problem is 
by means of what are called performance curves. By estimating the power 
available from the engine and the power required for level flight at various 
speeds, we can arrive at many interesting deductions. It is largely by this 
method that forecasts are made of the probable performance of an aeroplane, 
and it is remarkable how accurate these forecasts usually prove to be. 
218 MECHANICS OF FLIGHT 
Path of climb 
Horizontal 
Angle 
of climb 
L 
W 
W 
D 
T 
a 
a° 
a° 
Wsina 
Wcos a 
Fig 7.1 Forces acting on an aeroplane during a climb 
The procedure for jet and rocket systems of propulsion is rather different 
because, as already mentioned, we must think in terms of thrust rather than 
power. They will therefore be dealt with separately, and the following dis- 
cussion relates primarily to piston-engined aircraft. 
The deduction of the curve which gives the power output of the engine is 
outside the scope of this book, as it depends on a knowledge of the character- 
istics of the piston (or gas turbine) engine for a propeller-driven aircraft. From 
this curve must be subtracted the power which is lost through the inefficiency 
of the propeller (the efficiency of a good propeller at reasonable speed, but 
falling off on both sides depending on rpm, is about 80 per cent). The resulting 
curve (Fig. 7.2) shows the power which is available at various forward speeds 
of the aeroplane. 
The power which will be required is found by estimating the drag. For this 
purpose the wing drag and the parasite drag are usually found separately, the 
former from the characteristics of the aerofoils and the latter by estimating the 
drag of all the various parts and summing them up. Another method of finding 
the total drag is by measuring the drag of a complete model in a wind tunnel 
and scaling up to full size. After the total drag has been found at any speed, 
the power is obtained by multiplying the drag by the speed, as in flying for 
endurance in Chapter 5, e.g. if the total drag is 4170 N at 82.4 m/s -- 
Power required 4170 82.4 344 kW 
And in a similar way the power required is found at other speeds, the lower 
curve in Fig. 7.2 illustrating a typical result. The reader may be puzzled as to 
219 
PERFORMANCE 
C 
A 
Power, kilowatts
Forward speed of aeroplane, metres per second 
Forward speed of aeroplane, knots 
Max. power
available for
climbing
Min. speed of
level flight
Max. speed of level flight
Power required 
by propeller 
1000 
800 
600 
400 
200 
080 
100 120 140 160 180 200 220 240 
B 
D 
E 
F 
G 
50 
60 
70 
80 
90 100 110 120 
Loss due to inefficiency of propeller 
Power available from propeller 
Power given by engine to propeller 
Fig 7.2 Power available and power required 
why the power required increases so rapidly at low speeds; the explanation is 
that in order to maintain level flights at these low speeds, a very large angle of 
attack is required, and this results in an increase of drag in spite of the reduc- 
tion in speed. If the argument sounds familiar, it is simply because we are 
returning to the same argument as when discussing range and endurance. The 
figures we have just quoted are taken from that argument, and the curve of 
power required in Fig. 7.2 is based on the aeroplane of Chapter 5. This follow- 
up of the same aeroplane will make the power curves more interesting and 
instructive. 
It should be noted that there will be no fundamental difference in the shape 
of the power required curve for jet and propeller-driven aircraft. It is in the 
power available that the difference lies. 
Maximum and minimum speeds of horizontal flight 
From the combination of the two curves (Fig. 7.2) some interesting deductions 
can be made. Wherever the power available curve is above the power required 
curve, level flight is possible, whereas both to the left and right of the two 
intersections it becomes impossible for the rather obvious reason that we 
would require more power than we have available! Therefore the intersection 
A shows the least possible speed (51 m/s, as we had discovered before for other 
reasons), and the intersection B the greatest possible speed (115 m/s), at which 
level flight can be maintained. Between the points A and B the difference 
between the power available and the power required at any particular speed, 
i.e. the distance between the two curves, represents the amount of extra power 
which can be used for climbing purposes at that speed, and where the distance 
between the two curves is greatest, i.e. at CD, the rate of climb will be a 
maximum, while the corresponding point E shows that the best speed for 
climbing is 77 m/s. From the weight of the aeroplane 50 kN, and the extra 
power CD (680--320, i.e. 360 kW) available for climbing, we can deduce the 
vertical rate of climb, for if this is x m/s, then the work done per second in 
lifting 50 kN is 50 000 x watts, 
So50000x 360000 
and x 360 000/50 000 
7.2 m/s 
This represents the best rate of climb for this particular aeroplane, but it will 
only be attained if the pilot maintains the right speed of 77 m/s. As in gliding, 
there is a natural tendency to try to get a better climb by holding the nose up 
higher but, as will be seen from the curves, if the speed is reduced to 62 m/s 
220 MECHANICS OF FLIGHT 
only about 250 kN will be available for climbing, and this will reduce the rate 
of climb to 250 000/50 000, i.e. 5 m/s. Similarly, at speeds above 77 m/s the 
rate of climb will decrease, although it will be noticed that between certain 
speeds the curves run roughly parallel to each other and there is very little 
change in the rate of climb between 72 and 88 m/s; obviously at 51 m/s and 
again at 115 m/s, the rate of climb is reduced to nil, while below 51 and above 
115 m/s the aeroplane will lose height. 
As a matter of interest, the speeds for maximum endurance (F), 64 m/s, and 
maximum range (G), 82 m/s, have also been marked. As was explained in 
Chapter 5, these are the best speeds from the point of view of the aeroplane, 
but they may have to be modified to suit engine conditions. Note that the 
speed for maximum endurance (F) could be deduced from the curve, since it is 
the lowest point on the curve, i.e. the point of minimum power required for 
level flight. The speed for maximum range (G), however, must be obtained 
from Table 5.2, which showed the drag at various speeds. 
Effect of changes of engine power 
We have so far assumed that for a certain forward speed of the aeroplane the 
power available is a fixed quantity. This, of course, is not so, since the power 
of the engine can be varied considerably by manipulating the engine controls. 
If the curve shown in Fig. 7.2 represents the power available at some reason- 
ably economical conditions and in weak mixture, then we shall be able to get 
more power by using rich mixture, and the absolute maximum power by 
opening the throttle to the maximum permissible boost and using the 
maximum permissible rpm -- with fixed-pitch propellers this will simply be a 
case of full throttle. From this we shall get a curve of emergency full power 
(Fig. 7.3, overleaf). It will be noticed that the minimum speed of level flight is 
now slightly lower -- very slightly, so slightly as to be unimportant. The 
maximum speed is, as we might expect, higher -- perhaps not so much higher 
as we might expect (118 instead of 115 m/s). The most important change is in 
the rate of climb: 460 kW surplus power is now available for climbing, and the 
rate of climb is 9.2 m/s instead of 7.2 m/s. 
Except in special circumstances, it is inadvisable to fly with the engine 
'flat out', and, even so, full power must be used only for a limited time or 
there will be a risk of damage to the engine. The effects of decreasing the 
power are also shown in Fig. 7.3. From the point of view of the aeroplane, 
it makes no difference whether the power is decreased by reducing boost, 
or lowering the rpm, or both; but for fuel economy it is generally advisable 
to lower the rpm. It will be noticed that as the power is reduced, the 
minimum speed of level flight becomes slightly greater, the maximum speed 
becomes considerably less, and the possible rate of climb decreases at all 
speeds. 
221 
PERFORMANCE 
All this is what we might expect, with the possible exception of the fact, 
which pilots often do not realise, that the lowest speeds can be obtained with 
the engine running at full throttle. However, this flight condition cannot easily 
be sustained in practice because a small, inadvertent, decrease in speed would 
mean an increase in required power and a simultaneous decrease in available 
power. The speed reduction would then 'run away'; a condition called speed 
instability. 
Eventually, as the engine is throttled down, we reach a state of affairs at 
which there is only one possible speed of flight. This is the speed at which least 
engine power will be used, and at which we shall therefore obtain maximum 
endurance. It is rather puzzling to find that this speed (72 m/s) is different from 
the speed (64 m/s) at the lowest point of the power required curve. This is 
because the engine and propeller efficiency is slightly better at 72 than at 64 
m/s. 
Effect of altitude on power curves 
We have not yet exhausted the information which can be obtained from these 
performance curves, for if we can estimate the corresponding curves for 
various heights above sea-level we shall be able to see how performance is 
affected at different altitudes. There is much to be said, and much has been 
said, on the subject of whether it is preferable to fly high or to fly low when 
travelling from one place to another. It is one of those many interesting prob- 
lems about flight to which no direct answer can be given, chiefly because there 
222 MECHANICS OF FLIGHT 
1/2 power 
Emergency full power 
Power, kilowatts
Forward speed of aeroplane, metres per second 
Forward speed of aeroplane, knots 
98 
1000 
800 
600 
400 
200 
080 
100 120 140 160 180 200 220 240 
50 
60 
70 
80 
90 100 110 120 
Maximum economical power 
100 
102 
104 
109 115 123 
140 
168 
182 
205 
214 
223 
230 
4/10 ths 
9/10 ths 
8/10 ths 
7/10 ths 
6/10 ths 
195 
Fig 7.3 Effects of engine power 
are so many conflicting considerations which have to be taken into account. 
Some of them, such as the question of temperature, wind and the quantity of 
oxygen in the air, have already been mentioned when dealing with the atmos- 
phere, but the most important problem is that of performance. 
How will the performance be affected as the altitude of flight is increased? 
Well, as the altitude increases, the air density decreases. Therefore, to support 
the same aircraft weight whilst maintaining the same lift coefficient and atti- 
tude, it is necessary to increase the speed so as to maintain the same dynamic 
pressure. What this means is that we need to fly at the same indicated air 
speed. This also means that the drag will remain the same as before. Thus, 
from the point of view of the airframe, it appears at first as though there is no 
disadvantage in flying high. Indeed we can actually fly faster for the same 
amount of drag and thrust. The main trouble with flying high though comes 
from the engine and propulsion system. The propulsion problems may be sum- 
marised as follows. 
1. The power required is the product of the speed and the drag, so although 
the drag and thrust can remain the same when the height is increased, the 
increase in the speed means that the power required will increase. 
2. The power output of piston engines falls as the air density reduces, and 
although we can compensate for this by adding a supercharger or tur- 
bocharger, there is a limit to the amount of supercharging that it is 
practical to use. 
3. Since we need to fly faster to maintain the same lift and drag, the propeller 
will also have to go faster, and we will run into problems associated with 
compressible flow over the propeller. 
In addition to these propulsion problems there are some other important 
airframe and operational considerations. 
4. The cockpit and cabin need to be pressurised, which adds to the com- 
plexity and weight. 
5. As the height and speed are progressively increased, we will eventually 
encounter the problems associated with compressibility, especially in 
respect of the propeller. 
Whatever attempts are made to mitigate the difficulties of flight at high alti- 
tudes, in propeller-driven aircraft the general tendency remains for the power 
available to decrease and the power required to increase with the altitude (Fig. 
7.4, overleaf). This will cause the curves to close in towards each other, 
resulting in a gradual increase in the minimum speed and a decrease in the 
maximum speed, while the distance between the curves, and therefore the rate 
of climb, will also become less. Any pilot will confirm that this is what actu- 
ally happens in practice, although, as previously mentioned, he may be 
223 
PERFORMANCE 
somewhat deceived by the fact that the air speed indicator is also affected by 
the change in density and consequently reads lower than the true air speed. 
This is really what accounts for the curve of power required moving over to 
the right as the altitude increases; if the curves were plotted against indicated 
speed, the curves for 3000 m and 6000 m would simply be displaced upwards, 
compared with that for sea-level. The difference between true and indicated 
speed also accounts for another apparent discrepancy in that the curves as 
plotted (against true speed) suggest that the air speed to give the best rate of 
climb increases with height. This is so, but the indicated speed for best rate of 
climb falls with height. 
For certain purposes good performance at high altitudes may be of such 
importance that it becomes worth while to design the engine, propeller and 
aeroplane to give their best efficiencies at some specified height, such as 10 000 
metres. It may then happen that performance at sea-level is inferior to that at 
the height for which the machine was designed. Even so, above a certain critical 
height, 6000, 9000 m or whatever it may be, performance will inevitably fall 
off and so the performance curves will be very similar, except that the highest 
curve of power available will correspond to the critical height. In such aircraft 
it may well be that the advantages of flying high outweigh the disadvantages. 
Ceiling 
This process of improving performance at altitude cannot be continued indefi- 
nitely and we shall eventually reach such a height that there is only one 
possible speed for level flight and the rate climb is nil. This is called the ceiling. 
224 MECHANICS OF FLIGHT 
Power, kilowatts
True speed of aeroplane, metres per second 
True speed of aeroplane, knots 
1000 
800 
600 
400 
200 
080 100 120 140 160 180 200 220 240 
50 
60 
70 
80 
90 100 110 120 
Power available 20 000 ft 
Power required 20 000 ft 
Power required 10 000 ft 
Power required sea-level 
Min. speed 
20 000 ft 
155 knots 
Max. speed 
sea-level 
223 knots 
Min. speed 
10 000 ft 
120 knots 
Min. speed 
sea-level 
100 knots 
Max. speed 
10 000 ft 
240 knots 
Max. speed 
20 000 ft 
230 knots 
A 
Fig 7.4 Effects of altitude 
It requires extreme patience and time to reach such a ceiling, and, owing to 
the hopeless performance of the aeroplane when flying at this height, it is of 
little use for practical purposes, and therefore the idea of a service ceiling is 
introduced, this being defined as that height at which the rate of climb 
becomes less than 0.5 m/s, or some other specified rate. 
Effect of weight on performance 
It is sometimes important to be able to calculate what will be the effect on per- 
formance of increasing the total weight of an aeroplane by carrying extra load. 
Here again the performance curves will help us. 
If the weight is increased, the lift will also have to be increased. So we must 
either fly at a larger angle of attack or, if we keep the same angle of attack, at 
a higher speed. This speed can easily be calculated thus -- 
Let old weight W, new weight W1. 
Let V be the old speed, and V1 be the new speed at the same angle of attack. 
Since angle of attack is the same, CL will be the same. 
 W CL. rV2.S 
andW1 CL. rV12.S 
so V1/V  (W1/W) 
Such problems always become more interesting if we consider actual figures; 
so suppose that we wish to carry an extra load of 10 000 N on our aeroplane 
which already weighs 50 000 N; then -- 
V1/V  (60 000/50 000)  1.2 1.095 
Since the angle of attack is the same, the lift/drag ratio remains constant, and 
the corresponding drag, D, will be 
D1 D  D  
1.2D 
The corresponding power, P, is thus: 
P1 D1V1 1.2 1.095DV 1.2P 
65 000 
50 000 
L1 
L 
12 
1 
2 
225 
PERFORMANCE 
So, for example, if we take the point on the power-required curve (Fig. 7.4) 
marked A, the corresponding point A, will be at 
V1 1.095V, P1 1.2P 
i.e. V1 1.095 60 65.7 m/s 
andP1 1.2 310 372kW 
In a similar way, for each angle of attack, new speed and new power can be 
calculated, and thus a new curve of power required can be drawn for the new 
weight of the aeroplane. 
It is interesting to note that the net effects of the additional weight are 
exactly the same as the effects of an increase of altitude, i.e. -- 
1. Slight reduction in maximum speed. 
2. Large reduction in rate of climb. 
3. Increase in minimum speed. 
In short, the curve of power required is again displaced upwards. It will be 
noticed that there is too a slight increase in the best speed to use for climbing. 
(This must not be confused with rate of climb.) 
In spite of the similarity in effect of increase of weight and increase of alti- 
tude it should be noted that the increase of weight does not affect the reading 
of the air speed indicator, and so the results apply equally well whether we 
consider true or indicated air speed. 
The problems of operating piston engines at increasing altitude are such 
that their use is nowadays normally limited to flight at relatively low altitudes. 
This means that the piston engine is now relegated to use for light general avi- 
ation and specialist purposes. For propeller propulsion at higher altitudes and 
speeds, gas-turbine based turboprop propulsion is more appropriate, because 
the efficiency of the engine is less affected by altitude. The problem of pro- 
peller efficiency at high speed has been addressed with some success in recent 
years, and with very advanced propellers, it is indeed possible to fly even at 
transonic speeds. High-speed propellers are characterised by swept tips, giving 
a scimitar shape. The efficiency of propeller propulsion is theoretically greater 
than that of a pure jet, and for this reason, the turboprop is widely used for 
applications such as small regional airliners, transport aircraft and military 
trainers, where flight at very high altitude and speed is not necessary. Despite 
the advantages in terms of fuel consumption, the use of propellers does add to 
the weight, cost, complexity and servicing requirements. 
226 MECHANICS OF FLIGHT 
Influence of jet propulsion on performance 
In this chapter, we have so far looked at the performance of propeller driven 
aircraft, and it is now time to consider the effects of using turbojet propulsion. 
In Chapter 5 we saw that for the jet engine, thrust and fuel consumption do 
not change much with speed, and therefore the speeds for optimum range and 
endurance at any fixed altitude are faster than for a propeller driven aircraft 
with the same airframe. Also, as explained earlier in this chapter, by flying 
higher we will fly faster for a given amount of drag and thrust. This means that 
the optimum speeds for range and endurance also increase with altitude. 
Fortunately, the efficiency of the jet also rises with altitude, and we find that 
with turbojet propulsion, not only do the optimum speeds increase with 
height, but the number of kilometres that we can fly for each kilogram of fuel 
increases. Thus, for a jet aircraft, it is advantageous in terms of range, 
endurance and fuel cost to fly high and fast (Fig. 7C, overleaf). The limitation 
on maximum speed is normally provided by the onset of serious compress- 
ibility effects: transonic flow, which is dealt with in Chapter 11. The feature of 
obtaining the best economy at high speed is one reason for the popularity of 
jet propulsion for airliners, where passengers naturally want to get to their 
destinations as quickly and cheaply as possible. Other advantages are the low 
noise in the cabin, and the lack of vibration. 
When considering the performance of jet aircraft, it is important to 
appreciate some important differences between the way that jet and piston- 
engined aircraft are controlled. On a piston-engined aircraft, the pilot controls 
the engine power by means of the throttle control, so called, because it tra- 
ditionally controlled the air flow into the engine by throttling it. On a jet 
aircraft, the pilot controls the engine by adjusting the fuel flow, and it is the 
thrust that is controlled directly, rather than the power. Despite the fact that 
this control does not actually throttle anything, it still tends to be called the 
throttle, for historic reasons. 
Another difference between piston and jet propelled aircraft is that the 
higher speed of the latter means that the speed relative to the speed of sound 
becomes very important. For jet aircraft performance estimates, therefore, we 
need to display the data in a different form from that used for piston-engined 
aircraft. It is better to work in terms of thrust and drag rather than power 
required and power available, and we need to know how the thrust and drag 
vary with Mach number and altitude. This means that the simple performance 
calculations that we are able to use for practical purposes for low speed 
piston-engined aircraft are no longer appropriate for high-speed jet-engined 
aircraft. The proper method of dealing with their performance is rather com- 
plicated and beyond the intended level of this book, but in the numerical 
questions associated with this chapter, we have included some simple calcula- 
tions for jet aircraft at low speeds where compressibility effects can be ignored. 
227 
PERFORMANCE 
228 MECHANICS OF FLIGHT 
Can you answer these? 
1. 'When an aeroplane is climbing, the lift is less than the weight.' Explain 
why this statement is not so inconsistent as it sounds. 
2. What is the effect of altitude on the maximum and minimum speeds of an 
aeroplane? 
3. Distinguish between 'ceiling' and 'service ceiling'. 
4. In attempting to climb to the ceiling, should the air speed be kept constant 
during the climb? 
5. If the load carried by an aeroplane is increased, what will be the effects on 
performance? 
For solutions see Appendix 5. 
Numerical examples on Performance will be found in Appendix 3. 
229 
PERFORMANCE 
Fig 7C Cruise performance (opposite) 
(By courtesy of the Boeing Company) 
Two models of the Boeing 747. The nearer aircraft is a 747--400 which 
cruises at around 965 km/h (600 mph) at 9150 m, and has a cruise range 
of 13 528 km with 412 passengers. 
In a sense, any motion of an aeroplane may be considered as a manoeuvre. In 
no other form of transport is there such freedom of movement. An aeroplane 
may be said to have six degrees of freedom which are best described in relation 
to its three axes, defined as follows -- 
The longitudinal axis (Fig. 8.1) is a straight line running fore and aft 
through the centre of gravity and is horizontal when the aeroplane is in 
'rigging position'. 
The aeroplane may travel backwards or forwards along this axis. Backward 
motion -- such as a tail-slide -- is one of the most rare of all manoeuvres, but 
forward movement along this axis is the most common of all, and is the main 
feature of straight and level flight. 
Any rotary motion about this axis is called rolling. 
The normal axis (Fig. 8.1) is a straight line through the centre of gravity, 
and is vertical when the aeroplane is in rigging position. It is therefore at right 
angles to the longitudinal axis as defined above. 
The aeroplane may travel upwards or downwards along this axis, as in 
climbing or descending, but in fact such movement is not very common, the 
climb or descent being obtained chiefly by the inclination of the longitudinal 
axis to the horizontal, followed by a straightforward movement along that 
axis. 
Rotary motion of the aeroplane about the normal axis is called yawing. 
The lateral axis (Fig. 8.1) is a straight line through the centre of gravity at 
right angles to both the longitudinal and the normal axes. It is horizontal when 
the aeroplane is in rigging position and parallel to the line joining the wing 
tips. 
The aeroplane may travel to right or left along the lateral axis; such motion 
is called sideslipping or skidding. 
Rotary motion of the aeroplane about the lateral axis is called pitching. 
These axes must be considered as moving with the aeroplane and always 
remaining fixed relative to the aeroplane, e.g. the lateral axis will remain par- 
allel to the line joining the wing tips in whatever attitude the aeroplane may 
Manoeuvres 
CHAPTER8 
be, or, to take another example, during a vertical nose-dive the longitudinal 
axis will be vertical and the lateral and normal axes horizontal. 
So the manoeuvres of an aeroplane are made up of one or more, or even of 
all the following -- 
231 
MANOEUVRES 
Longitudinal 
axis 
Normal
axis
Pitching 
Longitudinal
axis
axis 
Lateral 
Yawing 
axis 
Lateral 
Rolling 
Normal
axis
Fig 8.1 The three axes 
1. Movement forwards or backwards. 
2. Movement up or down. 
3. Movement sideways, to right or left. 
4. Rolling. 
5. Yawing. 
6. Pitching. 
Some of these motions, or combinations of motion, are gentle in that they involve 
only a state of equilibrium. These have already been covered under the headings 
of level flight, gliding, climbing, and so on. In this chapter we shall deal with the 
more thrilling manoeuvres, those that involve changes of direction, or of speed, 
or of both -- in other words, accelerations. In such manoeuvres the aeroplane is 
no longer in equilibrium. There is more thrill for the pilot; more interest, but 
more complication, in thinking out the problems on the ground (Fig 8A). 
Accelerations 
Now the accelerations of an aeroplane along its line of flight are comparatively 
unimportant. They are probably greatest during the take-off, or, in the nega- 
tive sense, during the pull-up after landing. But the accelerations due to change 
in direction of flight are of tremendous importance. 
232 MECHANICS OF FLIGHT 
Fig 8A Manoeuvres 
A clipped-wing Spitfire in mock combat manoeuvres with a Chance 
Vought Corsair. 
As we have already discovered, when a body is compelled to move on a 
curved path, it is necessary to supply a force towards the centre, this force 
being directly proportional to the acceleration required. Such a force is called 
the centripetal force. The body will cause a reaction, that is to say an outward 
force, on whatever makes it travel on a curved path. This reaction is called by 
some people the centrifugal force. 
If an aeroplane is travelling at a velocity of V metres per second on the cir- 
cumference of a circle of radius r metres, then the acceleration towards the 
centre of the circle is V2/r metres per second per second. 
Therefore the centripetal (or centrifugal) force is m acceleration, where 
m is the mass of the aeroplane in kilograms, 
mV2/r newtons 
In practice aeroplanes very rarely travel for any length of time on the arc of a 
circle; but that does not alter the principle, since any small arc of a curve is, 
for all practical purposes, an arc of some circle with some radius, so all it 
means is that the centre and the radius of the circle keep changing as the aero- 
plane manoeuvres. 
The acceleration being V2/r shows that the two factors which decide the 
acceleration, and therefore the necessary force, are velocity and radius, the vel- 
ocity being squared having the greatest effect. Thus curves at high speed, tight 
turns at small radius, need large forces towards the centre of the curve. 
We can easily work out the acceleration, V2/r. For instance, for an aeroplane 
travelling at 82 m/s on a radius of 200 metres, the acceleration is (82 
82)/200 34 m/s2, which is a little less than 4 the acceleration due to 
gravity. For convenience, this is often written as 4g. However, before we go 
any further, we need to try to clear up some misunderstanding about the use 
of the symbol g. This letter is unfortunately used to represent several different 
things. Firstly, it represents the gravitational constant. By multiplying the mass 
by the gravitational constant g, we obtain the weight (written in mathematical 
terms W=m g). The gravitational constant g has a value of 9.81 m/s2 on the 
earth's surface, and this makes it look like an acceleration. In this context it is 
not an acceleration. As we noted in Chapter 1, a book resting on a fixed table 
has no acceleration, but it does have a weight equal to m g newtons. The 
trouble is that g is also used to represent the acceleration due to gravity. If the 
book falls off the table, it will accelerate at 9.81 m/s2; the acceleration will then 
be equal to g (9.81 m/s2). Fortunately, although g is commonly used to repre- 
sent two different things, it always has a value of 9.81 m/s2, so we can still use 
it for both purposes, as long as we make quite clear whether we are talking 
about an acceleration or a weight. Finally, to make things even more con- 
fusing, pilots (and racing car drivers) often talk about pulling a certain number 
of 'g's. Unfortunately, this usage is so common that we cannot ignore it. This 
quantity is not an acceleration, it is just a number. It has no units, and it simply 
represents a factor which, when multiplied by the weight, gives the total force 
233 
MANOEUVRES 
that must be applied to a body to balance the combined effects of gravity and 
centripetal acceleration. It is really a load factor, because it tells us how the 
loads and stresses in the airframe increase during a manoeuvre. In this book 
we will try to make things easier by using a bold letter 'g' in inverted commas 
for this quantity. 
Let us try to show how the difference in usage works, by taking a simple 
example of an aircraft with a mass of 1000 kg, which therefore has a weight 
of 1000g newtons, (since W m g). We will take as an example, the case of this 
aircraft pulling out of a dive, where it is subjected to a centripetal acceleration 
of 3g at the bottom of the manoeuvre. The centripetal force required to 
provide this acceleration will be 1000 3g newtons (since force mass 
acceleration). Now 1000 3g newtons is a force equal to 3 times the weight. 
This centripetal force will be provided by the lift from the wings. However, the 
wing has to support the weight of the aircraft (1000 g newtons) as well as 
providing the centripetal acceleration, so the total lift force must be 1000 
(3g  1g) newtons, which is 4 the weight. The pilot therefore refers to this 
as a 4 'g' manoeuvre. Not only will the lift and the stresses on the airframe by 
4 times their normal level flight value, but the pilot will feel as though he 
weighs 4 times as much as usual. From the above, you can begin to appreciate 
the problem. A 4 'g' pullout involves a 3g centripetal acceleration! 
Now consider what happens if the aircraft is at the top of a loop at the same 
speed, and with the same radius of curvature. At the top of the loop, the cen- 
tripetal acceleration required will still be 3g, and the total force required to 
produce this will still be 1000 3g newtons. However the weight of the air- 
craft will provide part the centripetal force required (1000 g newtons), 
leaving the wing lift (now pulling downward) to provide the extra 1000 2g 
newtons. Notice that although the centripetal acceleration is 3g, the wings 
only have to provide twice as much lift force as in level flight: that is 2 the 
weight. Also, the pilot will not be squashed so firmly into his seat as at the 
bottom of the pull-out manoeuvre, as his weight is trying to pull him out of 
the seat. Because the lift required is only 2 the weight, the load factor is only 
2, and the pilot would call this a 2 'g' manouevre. 
If the loop were performed at the same speed, but with three times the 
radius, then the centripetal acceleration would be 1g, so the required cen- 
tripetal force would be 1 the weight, and the weight alone could provide all 
the centripetal force required. The wings would need to produce no lift at all. 
This is therefore called a zero 'g' manoeuvre. The pilot would temporarily feel 
weightless. Indeed, performing an outside loop or 'bunt', that is with the air- 
craft the right way up (see later in this chapter), with a 1g centripetal 
acceleration is used as a way of providing trainee astronauts with an experi- 
ence of the weightless conditions that they will encounter in space flight. 
234 MECHANICS OF FLIGHT 
Pulling out of a dive 
We have already looked at one example involving a pull-out from a dive. Let 
us now look at some of the effects of this manoeuvre. Firstly, we have seen that 
the wings will have to generate more lift, in order to provide the necessary cen- 
tripetal acceleration. This means that the bending stresses in the wing will 
increase. In fact, in a 3 'g' pull out, they will be three times as high as for 
normal level flight. Design and safety requirements and regulations will specify 
the maximum load factor that the aircraft must be able to withstand, and all 
the stresses in the aircraft have to be determined for this condition. The 
required load factor will depend on the usage. Fully aerobatic types have a 
high specified maximum load factor, whereas civil transports have a lower 
requirement. You are not allowed to roll or loop airliners, although a roll has 
been performed on at least one occasion (without any passengers present). The 
pilot will be made aware of the maximum number of 'g's that the aircraft is 
permitted to be subjected to. 
In order to provide the necessary increase in lift, the lift coefficient CL must 
be increased by increasing the angle of attack. This in fact goes up as the 
square root of the 'g' factor. Clearly, there can come a point where the 
maximum CL is reached, and any attempt to further increase it will result in 
235 
MANOEUVRES 
8'g' manoeuvre 
centripetal acceleration 7g 
danger of physical injury to occupants 
stalling speed 85m/s 
5'g' manoeuvre 
centripetal acceleration 4g 
danger of 'blackout' 
Stalling speed 67m/s 
3'g' manoeuvre 
centripetal acceleration 2g 
Stalling speed 52m/s 
Fig 8.2 Pulling out of a dive 
the aircraft stalling. The greater the centripetal acceleration required, the 
higher will be the stalling speed. Stalling whilst attempting to pull out too 
steeply is a condition that pilots must avoid at all times. The consequences can 
be disastrous, as many dive-bomber pilots have found to their cost. Figure 8.2 
illustrates the case of an aircraft, having a level flight stalling speed of 30 m/s, 
pulling out of a steep dive. The load factor or 'g' level, the stalling speed and 
the centripetal accelerations are given for various cases. 
Apart from the loads on the airframe, any manoeuvre involving large cen- 
tripetal accelerations will have a physical effect on the pilot. The pilot's head 
will feel heavy, and he will experience difficulty in moving his arms, which 
now feel several times heavier than normal. Even at 1.5 'g's, writing becomes 
difficult. Worse than this, however, are the effects that the centripetal acceler- 
ation can have on his blood circulation. At around 4 to 5 'g', his heart, which 
is a pressure pump, will start to have difficulty pumping blood to his head, and 
if this is too severe, everything will appear to turn grey at first, and then he will 
be in danger of 'blacking out' and losing consciousness. 
Apart from the problem of stalling, this physiological factor also imposes a 
limit on the severity of the manoeuvre that can be performed. In fighter air- 
craft, several means have been employed to increase the amount of centripetal 
acceleration that can be tolerated. One simple approach is to have the pilot 
lying as near to horizontal as possible whilst still being able to see where he is 
going. Another involves the use of special 'g' suits which inflate at strategic 
points to temporarily restrict the flow of blood from the head. Ultimately, for 
extreme manoeuvres, the only way to overcome the limitations of human 
physiology is to remove the pilot and use an unmanned air vehicle (UAV), 
either remotely controlled, or even as an autonomous robot. 
The load factor 
In order to allow for the extra loads likely to be encountered during aero- 
batics, every part of an aeroplane is given a load factor, which varies according 
to conditions, being usually between 4 and 8. This means that the various 
parts are made from 4 to 8 times stronger than they need be for straight and 
level flight. 
Turning 
In an ordinary turn (Fig. 8B) the inward centripetal force is provided by the 
aeroplane banking so that the total lift on the wings, in addition to lifting the 
aeroplane, can supply a component towards the centre of the turn (Fig. 8.3, 
overleaf). 
236 MECHANICS OF FLIGHT 
Suppose an aeroplane of weight W newtons to be travelling at a velocity of 
V metres per second on the circumference of a circle of radius r metres, then 
the acceleration towards the centre of the circle is V2/r metres per second per 
second. 
Therefore the force required towards the centre 
WV2/gr newtons 
If the wings of the aeroplane are banked at an angle of q to the horizontal, and 
if this angle is such that the aeroplane has no tendency to slip either inwards 
or outwards, then the lift L newtons will act at right angles to the wings, and 
it must provide a vertical component, equal to W newtons, to balance the 
weight, and an inward component, of WV2/gr newtons, to provide the accel- 
eration towards the centre. 
This being so, it will be seen that -- 
tanq (WV2/gr) W V2/gr 
237 
MANOEUVRES 
Fig 8B Turning 
A Mustang making a tight turn near the ground. 
This simple formula shows that there is a correct angle of bank, q, for any turn 
of radius r metres at a velocity of V m/s, and that this angle of bank is quite 
independent of the weight of the aeroplane. 
Consider a numerical example -- 
Find the correct angle of bank for an aeroplane travelling on a circle of 
radius 120 m at a velocity of 53 m/s (take the value of g as 9.81 m/s2). 
V 53m/s 
r 120m 
tan q V2/gr (53 53)/(9.81 120) 2.38 
 q 67° approx 
What would be the effect if the velocity were doubled, i.e. 106 m/s? 
tanqwouldbe4 2.38 9.52 
 q 83°approx 
What would be the effect if the velocity were 53 m/s as in the first example, 
but the radius was doubled to 240 m instead of 120 m? 
238 MECHANICS OF FLIGHT 
W newtons 
Lift, L newtons 
Centripetal force 
W newtons 
? 
WV2 
gr newtons 
Fig 8.3 Forces acting on an aeroplane during a turn 
tan q would be 2.38/2 1.19 
 q 49°approx 
Thus we see that an increase in velocity needs an increase in the angle of bank, 
whereas if the radius of the turn is increased the angle of bank may be reduced, 
all of which is what we might expect from experiences of cornering by other 
means of transport. Figures 8.4 and 8.5 (overleaf) show the correct angle of 
bank for varying speeds and radii; notice again how the speed has more effect 
on the angle than does the radius of turn. 
Loads during a turn 
It will be clear from the figures that the lift on the wings during the turn is 
greater than during straight flight; it is also very noticeable that the lift 
increases considerably with the angle of bank. This means that structural com- 
ponents, such as the wing spars, will have to carry loads considerably greater 
than those of straight flight. 
Mathematically, W/L cos q, or L W/cos q 
i.e. at 60° angle of bank, lift 2W, stalling speed, 85 knots (44 m/s) 
at 70° angle of bank, lift 3W, stalling speed, 104 knots (53 m/s) 
239 
MANOEUVRES 
1 
00 kno 
ts
51 
m/s
60 knots 
31 m/s 
40 knots 
21 m/s 
Fig 8.4 Correct angles of bank 
Radius of turn 50 metres 
at 75° angle of bank, lift 4W, stalling speed, 120 knots (62 m/s) 
at 84° angle of bank, lift 10W, stalling speed, 190 knots (98 m/s) 
These figures mean that at these angles of bank, which are given to the nearest 
degree, the loads on the wing structure are 2, 3, 4, and 10 times respectively 
the loads of normal flight. This is simply our old friend g again, but in this 
instance it is certainly better to talk in terms of load than of g because the 
accelerations, and the corresponding loads, are in a horizontal plane while the 
initial weight is vertical; it is no longer a question of adding by simple arith- 
metic. 
Whatever the angle of bank, the lift on the wings must be provided by 
CL . rV2 . S. It follows, therefore, that the value of CL . rV2 . S must be 
greater during a turn than during normal flight, and this must be achieved 
either by increasing the velocity or increasing the value of CL. Thus it follows 
that the stalling speed, which means the speed at the maximum value of CL, 
must go up in a turn; as before it will go up in proportion of the square root 
of the wing loading, and the stalling speeds corresponding to the various 
angles of bank are shown in the table assuming, as for the pull-out of a dive, 
a stalling speed in level flight of 60 knots (31 m/s). These are all fairly steep 
banks; for banks up to 45° or so the loads are not serious, there is no danger 
12 
12 
240 MECHANICS OF FLIGHT 
Radius 30m 
Radius 40 m 
Radius 60 m 
Radius 100 m 
Fig 8.5 Correct angles of bank 
Air speed 60 knots (31 m/s) 
of blacking out, and the increase of stalling speed is quite small -- even so, it 
needs watching if one is already flying or gliding anywhere near the normal 
stalling speed, and suddenly decides to turn. At steep angles of bank we have 
to contend not only with the considerable increase of stalling speeds but with 
all the same problems as arose with the pull-out, i.e. blacking out, injury to 
pilot and crew, and the possibility of structural failure in the aircraft. It may 
seem curious that the angle of bank should be the deciding factor, but it must 
be remembered that the angle of bank (provided it is the correct angle of bank) 
is itself dependent on the velocity and radius of the turn, and these are the 
factors that really matter. In the history of fighting aircraft the ability to out- 
turn an opponent has probably counted more than any other feature, and from 
this point of view the question of steeply banked turns is one of paramount 
importance. An aspect of this question which must not be forgotten is that of 
engine power; steep turns can only be accomplished if the engine is powerful 
enough to keep the aeroplane travelling at high speed and at large angles of 
attack, perhaps even at the stalling angle. The normal duties of the engine are 
to propel the aeroplane at high speed at small angles of attack, or low speed 
at large angles of attack, but not both at the same time. The need for extra 
power in steeply banked tight turns has resulted in a technique in which the 
pilot embarking on such a manoeuvre suddenly applies all the power available. 
Correct and incorrect angles of bank 
We have so far assumed that the aeroplane is banked at the correct angle for 
the given turn. Fortunately the pilot has several means of telling whether the 
bank is correct or not (Fig. 8.6, overleaf), and since the methods help us to 
understand the mechanics of the turn, it may be as well to mention them here. 
A good indicator is the wind itself, or a vane, like a weather cock, mounted 
in some exposed position. In normal flight and in a correct bank the wind will 
come from straight ahead (neglecting any local effects from the slipstream); if 
the bank is too much, the aeroplane will sideslip inwards and the aeroplane, 
and pilot if he is in an open cockpit, will feel the wind coming from the inside 
of the turn, whereas if the bank is too small, the wind will come from the 
outside of the turn, due to an outward skid on the part of the aeroplane. 
Another indication would be a plumb-bob hung in the cockpit out of 
contact with the wind. In normal flight this would, of course, hang vertically; 
during a correct bank it would not hang vertically, but in exactly the same pos- 
ition relative to the aeroplane as it would in normal flight, i.e. it would bank 
with the aeroplane. If over-banked the plumb-line would be inclined inwards; 
if under-banked, outwards from the above position. This plumb-bob idea, in 
the form of a pendulum, forms the basis of the sideslip indicator which is pro- 
vided by the top pointer of the so-called turn and bank indicator. The pointer 
is geared so as to move in such a way that the pilot must move the control 
241 
MANOEUVRES 
column away from the direction of the pointer, this being the instinctive reac- 
tion. Sometimes a curved transparent tube containing a metal ball is used, and 
again the control column must be moved away from the indication given on 
the instrument. It is interesting to note that in early aeroplanes the slip indi- 
242 MECHANICS OF FLIGHT 
Streamer 
blows outwards 
Slip needle 
Water spills 
inwards 
Horizon 
Ball 
Turn needle 
Sideslip 
Angle of bank too large 
Normal axis 
of aeroplane 
Weights (including 
pilot) tend to fall 
inwards 
Plumb- 
bob 
Plumb- 
bob 
Streamer blows 
straight back 
Turn 
needle 
Ball 
Slip 
needle 
Water 
does 
not spill 
Normal axis 
Weights 
remain 
central 
Correct angle of bank 
Plumb- 
bob 
Streamer 
blows inwards 
Turn 
needle 
Ball 
Slip 
needle 
Water 
spills 
outward 
Skid Horizon 
Weights (including 
pilot) tend to 
slide outwards 
Angle of bank too small 
Fig 8.6 Effects of correct and incorrect angles of bank 
cator was, in effect, a spirit level, the tube being curved the opposite way and 
with a bubble (in liquid) instead of the ball; the pilot was then told to 'follow 
the bubble' -- not the instinctive reaction. Nowadays such simple mechanical 
devices are being replaced by electronic or digital displays which neverthless 
often mimic the apearance of the older instruments. Figure 8.6 shows how a 
tumbler full of water would not spill even when tilted at 80° in a correct bank; 
if the bank were too small it would spill outwards over the top lip of the 
tumbler! 
Lastly, during a correct bank the pilot will sit on his seat without any feeling 
of sliding either inwards or outwards; in fact, he will be sitting tighter on his 
seat than ever, his effective weight being magnified in the same proportions as 
the lift so that if he weighs 800 N in normal flight he will feel that he weighs 
8000 N when banking at 84°! If he over-banks he will tend to slide inwards, 
but outwards if the bank is insufficient. 
Other problems of turning 
In order to get into a turn the pilot puts on bank by means of the ailerons, but once 
the turn has commenced the outer wing will be travelling faster than the inner 
wing and will therefore obtain more lift, so he may find that not only is it necessary 
to take off the aileron control but actually to apply opposite aileron by moving 
the control column against the direction of bank -- this is called holding off bank. 
An interesting point is that this effect is different in turns on a glide and on 
a climb. On a gliding turn the whole aircraft will move the same distance 
downwards during one complete turn, but the inner wing, because it is turning 
on a smaller radius, will have descended on a steeper spiral than the outer 
wing; therefore the air will have come up to meet it at a steeper angle, in other 
words the inner wing will have a larger angle of attack and so obtain more lift 
than the outer wing. The extra lift obtained in this way may compensate, or 
more than compensate, the lift obtained by the outer wing due to increase in 
velocity. Thus in a gliding turn there may be little or no need to hold off bank. 
In a climbing turn, on the other hand, the inner wing still describes a steeper 
spiral, but this time it is an upward spiral, so the air comes down to meet the 
inner wing more than the outer wing, thus reducing the angle of attack on the 
inner wing. So, in this case, the outer wing has more lift both because of vel- 
ocity and because of increased angle, and there is even more necessity for 
holding off bank than during a normal turn. 
Another interesting way of looking at the problem of gliding and climbing 
turns is to analyse the motion of an aircraft around its three axes during such 
turns. In a flat turn, i.e. a level turn without any bank, the aircraft is yawing 
only. In a banked level turn, the aircraft is yawing and pitching -- in the extreme 
of a vertically banked turn it would be pitching only. But in a gliding or climbing 
turn the aircraft is pitching, yawing and rolling. In a gliding turn it is rolling 
243 
MANOEUVRES 
inwards;inaclimbing turn, outwards. The inward roll of the gliding turn causes 
the extra angle of attack on the inner wing, the outward roll of the climbing 
turn on the outer wing. Many people find it difficult to believe this. If the reader 
is in such difficulty conviction may come from one of two methods; which will 
suit best will depend upon the reader's temperament. The mathematically- 
minded may like to analyse the motion in terms of the following (Fig. 8.7) -- 
The rate of turn of the complete aeroplane (about the vertical), W. 
The angle of bank of the aeroplane, q. 
The angle of pitch of the aeroplane, f. 
A little thought will reveal the fact that the 
Rateofyaw  W.cosf.cosq. 
Rateofpitch  W.cosf.sinq. 
Rateofroll  W.sinf. 
Translating this back into English, and taking one of the extreme examples, 
whenq 0,i.e.nobank,andf 0,i.e.nopitch,cosqandcosfwillbe1, 
sinqandsinfwillbe0. 
rate of yaw W rate of turn of complete aeroplane. 
Rate of pitch and rate of roll are zero. All of which we had previously decided 
for the flat turn. 
The reader (mathematically-minded) may like to work out the other 
extremes such as the vertical bank (q 90°) or vertical pitch (f 90°), or 
better still the more real cases with reasonable values of q and f. 
244 MECHANICS OF FLIGHT 
Angle of bank 
Rate of 
turn O 
? 
f 
Angle of 
inclination of 
longitudinal 
axis 
Fig 8.7 Gliding turns 
Notice that the rate of roll depends entirely on the angle of pitch, i.e. the 
inclination of the longitudinal axis to the vertical -- if this is zero, there is no 
rate of roll even though the aircraft may be descending or climbing. 
What about the reader who does not like mathematics? Get hold of a model 
aeroplane, or, failing this, a waste-paper basket and spend a few minutes 
making it do upward and downward spirals; some people are convinced by 
doing gliding and climbing turns with their hand and wrist -- and their friends 
may be amused in watching! 
At large angles of bank there is less difference in velocity, and in angle, 
between inner and outer wings, and so the question of holding off bank 
becomes less important; but much more difficult problems arise to take its 
place. 
First, though, let us go back to the other extreme and consider what is 
called a 'flat turn', i.e. one that is all yaw and without any bank at all. 
Very slight turns of this kind have sometimes been useful when approaching 
a target for bombing purposes, but otherwise they are in the nature of 'crazy 
flying', in other words, incorrect flying, and good pilots always try to keep 
their sideslip indicator in the central position. Actually flat turns are rather dif- 
ficult to execute for several reasons. First, the extra velocity of the other wing 
tends to bank the aeroplane automatically; secondly, the lateral stability 
(explained later) acts in such a way as to try to prevent the outward skid by 
banking the aeroplane; thirdly, the side area is often insufficient to provide 
enough inward force to cause a turn except on a very large radius; fourthly, 
the directional stability (also explained later) opposes the action of the rudder 
and tends to put the nose of the aircraft back so that it will continue on a 
straight path. Taking these four reasons together, it will be realised that an 
aeroplane has a strong objection to a flat turn! 
Modern aircraft have a small side surface and if this is coupled with good 
directional stability, for the last two reasons particularly, a flat turn becomes 
virtually impossible. So much is this so that it is very little use applying rudder 
to start a turn, the correct technique being to put on bank only. 
Controls on steep banks 
The turning of an aeroplane is also interesting from the control point of view 
because as the bank becomes steeper the rudder gradually takes the place of 
the elevators, and vice versa. This idea, however, needs treating with a certain 
amount of caution because, in a vertical bank for instance, the rudder is 
nothing like so powerful in raising or lowering the nose as are the elevators in 
normal horizontal flight. Incidentally, the reader may have realised that a ver- 
tical bank, without sideslip, is theoretically impossible, since in such a bank 
the lift will be horizontal and will provide no contribution towards lifting the 
weight. If it is claimed that such a bank can, in practice, be executed, the 
245 
MANOEUVRES 
explanation must be that a slight upward inclination of the fuselage together 
with the propeller thrust provides sufficient lift. 
This only applies to a continuous vertical bank in which no height is to be 
lost; it is perfectly possible, both theoretically and practically, to execute a turn 
in which, for a few moments, the bank is vertical, or even over the vertical. In 
the latter case the manoeuvre is really a combination of a loop and a turn. 
Generally speaking, the radius of turn can be reduced as the angle of bank 
is increased, but even with a vertical bank there is a limit to the smallness of 
the radius because, quite apart from the question of side-slipping, the lift on 
the wings (represented by CL . rV2. S) must provide all the force towards the 
centre, i.e. m . V2/r or WV2/gr. 
Thus WV2/gr CL . rV2. S 
or 
r 2W/(CL.rS.g) 
Now, in straight and level flight the stalling speed (Vs) is given by the equation 
W L CLmax.CL. rVs2.S 
If we substitute this value of W into our formula for the radius we get 
r (2.CLmax.CL. rVs2.S)/(CL.rS.g) 
i.e. r (Vs2/g) (CLmax/CL) 
This shows that the radius of turn will be least when CL is equal to CL max, 
i.e. when the angle of attack is the stalling angle, and radius of turn Vs2/g. 
It is rather interesting to note that the minimum radius of turn is quite inde- 
pendent of the actual speed during the vertical banks; it is settled only by the 
stalling speed of the particular aeroplane. Thus, to turn at minimum radius, 
one must fly at the stalling angle, but any speed may be employed provided the 
engine power is sufficient to maintain it. In actual practice, the engine power 
is the deciding factor in settling the minimum radius of turn whether in a ver- 
tical bank or any other bank, and it must be admitted that it is not usually 
possible to turn on such a small radius as the above formula would indicate. 
This formula applies to some extent to all steep turns and shows that the 
aeroplane with the lower stalling speed can make a tighter turn than one with 
a higher stalling speed. (We are referring, as explained above, to the stalling 
speed in straight and level flight.) But in order to take advantage of this we 
must be able to stand the g's involved in the steep banks, and we must have 
engine power sufficient to maintain turns at such angles of bank. 
12 
12 
12 
12 
246 MECHANICS OF FLIGHT 
Aerobatics 
The usual aerobatics are loops, spins, rolls, sideslips, and nose-dives, to which 
may be added upside-down flight, the inverted spin, and the inverted loop. The 
manoeuvres may also be combined in various ways, e.g. a half loop followed 
by a half roll, or a half roll followed by the second half of a loop. 
There are many reasons why aerobatics should be performed in those types 
of aircraft which are suitable for them. They provide excellent training for 
accuracy and precision in manoeuvre, and give a feeling of complete mastery 
of the aircraft, which is invaluable in all combat flying. They may also be used 
for exhibition purposes, but modern aircraft are so fast and the radius on 
which they can turn or manoeuvre is so large that, in many ways, they provide 
less of a spectacle than older types. Not least, aerobatics increase the joy and 
sensations of flight to the pilot himself -- not quite so much to other occupants 
of the aircraft! 
The movements of the aeroplane during these aerobatics are so complicated 
that they baffle any attempt to reduce them to the terms of simple mechanics 
and, indeed, to more advanced theoretical considerations, unless assumptions 
are made which are not true to the facts. 
Figs 8.8 and 8.9 (overleaf) show the approximate path travelled by a slow 
type of aircraft during a loop and the corresponding 'accelerometer' diagram 
which shows how the force on the wings varies during the manoeuvre. From 
this it will be seen that, as in many manoeuvres, the greatest loads occur at the 
moment of entry. Notice also that even at the top of the loop the load is very 
little less than normal -- that is to say, that the pilot is sitting firmly on his seat 
in the upward direction, the loads will still be in the same direction relative to 
the aircraft as in normal flight, and our plumb bob will be hanging upwards! 
247 
MANOEUVRES 
60 knots 
80 knots 
100 knots 
80 knots 
100 knots 
100 knots 
120 knots 
120 knots 
100 knots 
80 knots 
70 knots 
A 
B 
C 
D 
Fig 8.8 A loop 
Only in a bad loop will the loads at the top become negative, causing the loads 
on the aircraft structure to be reversed and the pilot to rely on his straps to 
prevent him from falling out. 
Simple theoretical problems can be worked out on such assumptions as that 
a loop is in the form of a circle or that the velocity remains constant during 
the loop, but the error in these assumptions is so great that very little practical 
information can be obtained by attempting to solve such problems, and it is 
much better to rely on the results of practical experiments. 
A Spin (Fig. 8.10) is an interesting manoeuvre, if only for the reason that at 
one time there stood to its discredit a large proportion of all aeroplane acci- 
dents that had ever occurred. It differs from other manoeuvres in the fact that 
the wings are 'stalled', -- i.e. are beyond the critical angle of attack, and this 
accounts for the lack of control which the pilot experiences over the move- 
ments of the aeroplane while spinning; it is, in fact, a form of 'auto-rotation' 
(Fig. 8.11), which means that there is a natural tendency for the aeroplane to 
rotate of its own accord. This tendency will be explained a little more fully 
when dealing with the subject of control at low speeds in the next chapter. In 
a spin the aeroplane follows a steep spiral path, but the attitude while spinning 
may vary from the almost horizontal position of the 'flat' spin to the almost 
vertical position of the 'spinning nose-dive'. In other words the spin, like a 
gliding turn or steep spiral is composed of varying degrees of yaw, pitch and 
roll. A flat spin is chiefly yaw, a spinning nose-dive chiefly roll. The amount of 
pitch depends on how much the wings are banked from the horizontal. In 
general, the air speed during a spin is comparatively low, and the rate of 
descent is also low. Any device, such as slots, which tend to prevent stalling, 
will also tend to minimise the danger of the accidental spin and may even 
make it impossible to carry out deliberately. The area and disposition of the 
248 MECHANICS OF FLIGHT 
Force on wings,
number of times normal load
1 minute 
4 
3 
2 
1 
00 
Accelerometer record 
A 
B 
C 
D 
1 
4 
1 
2 
34 
Fig 8.9 Accelerometer diagram for a loop 
249 
MANOEUVRES 
One wing drops 
Stalling 
Axis of spin
Fig 8.10 A spin 
Angle of attack 
Rising wing, less lift
No autorotation
Falling wing,
more lift
Rising wing,
more lift
Autorotation
Falling wing,
less lift
CL 
Fig 8.11 Cause of auto-rotation 
fin, rudder, and tail plane exert considerable influence on the susceptibility of 
the aeroplane to spinning. 
Many of the terrors of a spin were banished once it was known just what 
it was. We then realised that in order to get out of a spin we must get it out of 
the stalled state by putting the nose down, and we must stop it rotating by 
applying 'opposite rudder'. In practice, the latter is usually done first, because 
it is found that the elevators are not really effective until the rotation is 
stopped. The farther back the centre of gravity, and the more masses that are 
distributed along the length of the fuselage, the flatter and faster does the spin 
tend to become and the more difficult is it to recover. This flattening of the spin 
is due to the centrifugal forces that act on the masses at the various parts of 
the aircraft (Fig. 8.12). A spin is no longer a useful combat manoeuvre, nor is 
it really a pleasant form of aerobatics, but since it is liable to occur acciden- 
tally, pilots are taught how to recover from it. 
During a roll (Fig. 8.13) the aeroplane rotates laterally through 360°, but 
the actual path is in the nature of a horizontal corkscrew, there being varying 
degrees of pitch and yaw. In the so-called slow roll the loads in the 180° pos- 
ition are reversed, as in inverted flight, whereas in the other extreme, the 
barrel roll, which is a cross between a roll and a loop, the loads are never 
reversed. 
In a sideslip (Fig. 8.14) there will be considerable wind pressure on all the 
side surfaces of the aeroplane, notably the fuselage, the fin and the rudder, 
while if the planes have a dihedral angle the pressure on the wings will tend to 
bring the machine on to an even keel. The sideslip is a useful manoeuvre for 
250 MECHANICS OF FLIGHT 
Axis of spin
Axis round which
aircraft is rotating
Centrifugal force 
due to masses 
in tail 
Couple due to 
centrifugal forces 
C.F. due to 
masses 
in nose 
Centre of 
gravity 
Fig 8.12 Tendency of a spin to flatten owing to centrifugal force 
losing height or for compensating a sideways drift just prior to landing, but, 
as already mentioned, modern types of aircraft do not take very kindly to 
sideslipping. The small side area means that they drop very quickly if the 
sideslip is at all steep, and the directional stability is so strong that it may be 
impossible to hold the nose of the machine up (by means of the rudder), and 
the dropping of the nose causes even more increase of speed. 
A nose-dive is really an exaggerated form of gliding; the gliding angle may 
be as great as 90° -- i.e. vertical descent -- although such a steep dive is rarely 
performed in practice. If an aeroplane is dived vertically it will eventually reach 
a steady velocity called the terminal velocity. In such a dive the weight is 
entirely balanced by the drag, while the lift has disappeared. The angle of 
attack is very small or even negative, there is a large positive pressure near the 
leading edge on the top surface of the aerofoil, tending to turn the aeroplane 
on to its back, and this is balanced by a considerable 'down' load on the tail 
plane (Fig. 8.15, overleaf). In such extreme conditions the terms used are apt 
to be misleading; for instance, the 'down' load referred to is horizontal, while 
the lift, if any such exists, will also be horizontal. The terminal velocity of 
modern aeroplanes is very high, and it makes little difference whether the 
engine is running or not. They lose so much height in attaining the terminal 
velocity that, in practice, it is doubtful whether it can ever be reached. As was 
only to be expected, the problems which accompany the attainment of a speed 
near to the speed of sound first made themselves felt in connection with the 
nose-dive, especially at high altitudes. At that time these compressibility effects 
were a special feature of nose-diving, but there was one consoling feature -- as 
one got nearer the earth, terminal velocities were lower (owing to the greater 
251 
MANOEUVRES 
Level 
flight 
Level 
flight 
90° roll 
180° roll 270° roll 
Fig 8.13 A roll 
Direction 
of sideslip 
Fig 8.14 A sideslip 
density), and the speed of sound was higher (owing to the higher temperature). 
So if one got into trouble high up, there was always a chance of getting out of 
it lower down. But nowadays, when more and more aircraft can exceed the 
speed of sound in level flight, and when compressibility troubles are no longer 
associated with fears of the unknown, these ideas are out of date, and the 
whole subject of flight at and above the speed of sound will be considered in 
Chapters 11 and 12. 
The nose-dive, and the pulling-out of a nose-dive, are two entirely different 
problems, and the latter has already been fully dealt with. 
Inverted manoeuvres 
Real upside-down flight (Fig. 8.16) is not so often attempted as is commonly 
supposed, and should be distinguished from a glide in the inverted position, 
252 MECHANICS OF FLIGHT 
Drag 
Downward 
load 
Pitching 
moment on 
main planes 
Weight 
Direction of dive 
Fig 8.15 Nose-dive 
which does not involve problems affecting the engine. If height is to be main- 
tained during inverted flight, the engine must, of course, continue to run and 
this necessitates precautions being taken to ensure a supply of fuel and, with 
a piston engine, the proper functioning of the carburettor. The aerofoil will be 
inverted, and therefore, unless of the symmetrical type, will certainly be inef- 
ficient; while in order to produce an angle of attack, the fuselage will have to 
be in a very much 'tail-down' attitude. The stability will be affected, although 
some aircraft have been more stable when upside-down than the right way up, 
and considerable difficulty has been experienced in restoring them to normal 
flight. In spite of all the disabilities involved, some aeroplanes are capable of 
maintaining height in the inverted position (Fig. 8C, overleaf). 
The inverted spin is in most of its characteristics similar to the normal spin; 
in fact, in some instances pilots report that the motion is more steady and 
therefore more comfortable. As in inverted flight, however, the loads on the 
aeroplane structure are reversed and the pilot must rely on his straps to hold 
him in the machine. 
The inverted loop, or 'double bunt', in which the pilot is on the outside of 
the loop (Fig. 8.17, overleaf), is a manoeuvre of extreme difficulty and danger. 
The difficulty arises from the fact that whereas in the normal loop the climb 
to the top of the loop is completed while there is speed and power in hand and 
engines and aerofoils are functioning in the normal fashion, in the inverted 
loop the climb to the top is required during the second portion of the loop, 
when the aerofoils are in the inefficient inverted position. The danger is 
incurred because of the large reversed loads and also because of the physiolog- 
ical effects of the pilot's blood being forced into his head. It was a long time 
before this manoeuvre was successfully accomplished, and once it had been, so 
many foolhardy pilots began to attempt it -- often with fatal results -- that it 
had to be forbidden, except under very strict precautions and regulations. 
253 
MANOEUVRES 
Direction 
of flight 
Lift on tail plane 
Lift on wings 
due to angle 
of attack 
Fig 8.16 Upside-down flight 
254 MECHANICS OF FLIGHT 
Fig 8C Inverted flight 
(By courtesy of 'Flight') 
And to illustrate upside-down flight, the Hurricane of the Second World 
War; note the tail-down attitude usually associated with inverted flight. 
Normal 
flight 
Reversed loads 
on wing structure 
Fig 8.17 The inverted loop 
'Bumpy' weather 
In addition to the loads incurred during definite aerobatics, all aircraft are 
required to face the effects of unsteady weather conditions. Accelerometer 
records show that these may be quite considerable, and they must certainly be 
reckoned with when designing commercial aircraft. Where aeroplanes are, in 
any case, required to perform aerobatics, they will probably be amply strong 
enough to withstand any loads due to adverse weather. The conditions which 
are likely to inflict the most severe loads consist of strong gusty winds, hot sun, 
intermittent clouds, especially thunder clouds in which there is often consider- 
able turbulence, and uneven ground conditions; a combination of all these 
factors will, almost certainly, spell a 'rough passage'. The turbulence and up- 
currents that may be encountered in severe thunderstorms and in 
cumulo-nimbus clouds can sometimes be such as to tax the strength of the 
aeroplane and the flying skill of the pilot. 
Manoeuvrability 
Before leaving the subject of manoeuvres we ought to mention that the 
inertia of an aeroplane -- or, to be more correct, the moment of inertia of the 
various parts -- will largely determine the ease or otherwise of handling the 
machine during manoeuvres. Without entering into the mathematical 
meaning of moment of inertia, we can say that, in effect, it means the 
natural resistance of the machine to any form of rotation about its centre of 
gravity. Any heavy masses which are a long distance away from a particular 
axis of rotation will make it more difficult to cause any rapid movement 
around the axis; thus masses such as engines far out on the wings result in 
a resistance to rolling about the longitudinal axis; and a long fuselage with 
large masses well forward or back will mean a resistance to pitching and 
yawing. 
Can you answer these? 
See if you can answer these questions about the various manoeuvres which an 
aeroplane can perform -- 
1. What are the six degrees of freedom of an aeroplane? 
2. Why is there a definite limit to the smallness of the radius on which an 
aeroplane can turn? 
255 
MANOEUVRES 
3. Two aircraft turn through 360° in the same time, i.e. at the same rate of 
turn, but the radius of turn of one is twice that of the other. Will they have 
the same angle of bank? If not, which will have the greater? 
4. Explain the difference between a gliding and climbing turn from the point 
of view of holding off bank. 
5. Why does an aeroplane spin? 
For solutios see Appendix 5. 
Numerical examples on manoeuvres will be found in Appendix 3. 
256 MECHANICS OF FLIGHT 
Fig 8D Manoeuvres 
(By courtesy of the Lockheed Aircraft Corporation, USA) 
A rigid-rotor helicopter performing aerobatic manoeuvres. 
Meaning of stability and control 
The stability of an aeroplane means its ability to return to some particular con- 
dition of flight (after having been slightly disturbed from that condition) 
without any efforts on the part of the pilot. An aeroplane may be stable under 
some conditions of flight and unstable under other conditions. For instance, an 
aeroplane which is stable during straight and level flight may be unstable when 
inverted, and vice versa. If an aeroplane were stable during a nose-dive, it 
would mean that it would resist efforts on the part of the pilot to extricate it 
from the nose-dive. The stability is sometimes called inherent stability. Note 
that, nowadays, some military combat aircraft are deliberately made to be 
inherently unstable, as this increases their manoeuvrability, and can reduce 
drag. This requires a sophisticated automatic artificial stabilisation system, 
which has to be totally reliable. Because of the potentially disastrous conse- 
quences of system failure, inherent instability is not permitted on civil aircraft, 
but with adequate safeguard it is possible to relax the level of stability com- 
pared to older types, and this has benefits in terms of reduced drag. To the 
pilot, the artificial stabilisation system makes the aircraft feel and handle as 
though it were stable. 
Stability is often confused with the balance or 'trim' of an aircraft, and the 
student should be careful to distinguish between the two. An aeroplane which 
flies with one wing lower than the other may often, when disturbed from this 
attitude, return to it. Such an aeroplane is out of its proper trim, but it is not 
unstable. 
There is a half-way condition between stability and instability, for, as 
already stated, an aeroplane which, when disturbed, tends to return to its orig- 
inal position is said to be stable; if, on the other hand, it tends to move farther 
away from the original position, it is unstable. But it may tend to do neither 
of these and prefer to remain in its new position. This is called neutral stab- 
ility, and is sometimes a very desirable feature. 
Stability and control 
CHAPTER9 
Figure 9.1 illustrates some of the ways in which an aeroplane may behave 
when it is left to itself. Only a pitching motion is shown; exactly the same con- 
siderations apply to roll and yaw, although a particular aeroplane may have 
quite different stability characteristics about its three axes. The top diagram 
shows complete dead-beat stability which is very rarely achieved in practice. 
The second is the usual type of stability, that is to say an oscillation which is 
gradually damped out. The steady oscillation shown next is really a form of 
neutral stability, while the bottom diagram shows the kind of thing which may 
easily occur in certain types of aircraft, an oscillation which steadily grows 
worse. Even this is not so bad as the case when an aeroplane makes no attempt 
to return but simply departs farther and farther away from its original path. 
That is complete instability. 
The degree of stability may differ according to what are called the stick- 
fixed and stick-free conditions; in pitching, for instance, stick-fixed means that 
the elevators are held in their neutral position relative to the tail plane, 
whereas stick-free means that the pilot releases the control column and allows 
the elevators to take up their own positions. 
Another factor affecting stability is whether it is considered -- and tested -- 
under the condition of power-off or power-on. On modern aircraft the engine 
thrust can be comparable with or even greater than the airframe weight and 
therefore may significantly influence the stability. 
258 MECHANICS OF FLIGHT 
Original path of flight 
Fig 9.1 Degrees of stability 
Control means the power of the pilot to manoeuvre the aeroplane into any 
desired position. It is not by any means the same thing as stability; in fact, the 
two characteristics may directly oppose each other. 
The stability or control of an aeroplane in so far as it concerns pitching 
about the lateral axis is called longitudinal stability or control respectively. 
Stability or control which concerns rolling about the longitudinal axis is 
called lateral stability or control. 
Stability or control which concerns yawing about the normal axis is called 
directional stability or control. 
Before we attempt to explore this subject any further we feel it is our duty 
to warn the reader that the problems involved in the consideration of stability 
and control of aeroplanes are considerable. Any attempt at 'simple' expla- 
nation of such problems may, at the best, be incomplete and possibly incorrect. 
Readers need have no fear of the mathematics, as we shall not even attempt to 
tackle them, but they must be prepared, if and when they acquire greater 
knowledge of the subject from more advanced works, to readjust their ideas 
accordingly. 
After this very necessary apology we will try to explain, at any rate, the 
practical considerations which affect stability and control. 
Longitudinal stability 
We shall start with longitudinal stability, since this can be considered indepen- 
dently of the other two. In order to obtain stability in pitching, we must ensure 
that if the angle of attack is temporarily increased, forces will act in such a way 
as to depress the nose and thus decrease the angle of attack once again. To a 
great extent we have already tackled this problem while dealing with the 
pitching moment, and the movement of the centre of pressure on aerofoils. We 
have seen that an ordinary upswept wing with a cambered aerofoil section 
cannot be balanced or 'trimmed' to give positive lift and at the same time be 
stable in the sense that a positive increase in incidence produces a nose-down 
pitching moment about the centre of gravity. 
The position as regards the wing itself can be improved to some extent by 
sweepback, by wash-out (i.e. by decreasing the angle of incidence) towards the 
wing tips, by change in wing section towards the tips (very common in modern 
types of aircraft), and by a reflex curvature towards the trailing edge of the 
wing section. 
But it is not only the wing that affects the longitudinal stability of the air- 
craft as a whole, and in general it can be said that this is dependent on four 
factors -- 
1. The position of the centre of gravity, which must not be too far back; this 
is probably the most important consideration. 
259 
STABILITY AND CONTROL 
2. The pitching moment on the main planes; this, as we have seen, usually 
tends towards instability, though it can be modified by the means men- 
tioned. 
3. The pitching moment on the fuselage or body of the aeroplane; this too is 
apt to tend towards instability. 
4. The tail plane -- its area, the angle at which it is set, its aspect ratio, and 
its distance from the centre of gravity. This is nearly always a stabilising 
influence (Fig. 9.2). 
Longitudinal dihedral 
The tail plane is usually set at an angle less than that of the main planes, the 
angle between the chord of the tail plane and the chord of the main planes being 
known as the longitudinal dihedral (Fig. 9.3). This longitudinal dihedral is a 
practical characteristic of most types of aeroplane, but so many considerations 
enter into the problem that it cannot be said that an aeroplane which does not 
possess this feature is necessarily unstable longitudinally. In any case, it is the 
actual angle at which the tail plane strikes the airflow, which matters; therefore 
we must not forget the downwash from the main planes. This downwash, if the 
tail plane is in the stream, will cause the actual angle of attack to be less than the 
angle at which the tail plane is set (Fig. 5.6). For this reason, even if the tail plane 
is set at the same angle as the main planes, there will in effect be a longitudinal 
dihedral angle, and this may help the aeroplane to be longitudinally stable. 
260 MECHANICS OF FLIGHT 
+ve 
Rectangular wing 
Unstable slope 
Angle of attack 
Complete aircraft 
Longitudinally stable 
Tail plane 
Very stable slope 
Moment coefficient
--ve 
--4° 
0° 
4° 
8° 
12° 
Fig 9.2 Pitching moment coefficient about centre of gravity 
Wing, tail plane and complete aircraft. 
Suppose an aeroplane to be flying so that the angle of attack of the main 
planes is 4° and the angle of attack of the tail plane is 2°; a sudden gust causes 
the nose to rise, inclining the longitudinal axis of the aeroplane by 1°. What 
will happen? The momentum of the aeroplane will cause it temporarily to con- 
tinue moving practically in its original direction and at its previous speed. 
Therefore the angle of attack of the main planes will become nearly 5° and of 
the tail plane nearly 3°. The pitching moment (about the centre of gravity) of 
the main planes will probably have a nose-up, i.e. unstable tendency, but that 
of the tail plane, with its long leverage about the centre of gravity, will defi- 
nitely have a nose-down tendency. If the restoring moment caused by the tail 
plane is greater than the upsetting moment caused by the main planes, and 
possibly the fuselage, then the aircraft will be stable. 
This puts the whole thing in a nutshell, but unfortunately it is not quite so 
easy to analyse the practical characteristics which will bring about such a state 
of affairs; however the forward position of the centre of gravity and the area 
and leverage of the tail plane will probably have the greatest influence. 
It is interesting to note that a tail plane plays much the same part, though 
more effectively, in providing longitudinal stability, as does reflex curvature on 
a wing, or sweepback with wash-out of incidence towards the tips. 
When the tail plane is in front of the main planes (Fig. 5E) there will prob- 
ably still be a longitudinal dihedral, which means that this front surface must 
have greater angle than the main planes. The latter will naturally still be at an 
efficient angle, such as 4°, so that the front surface may be at, say, 6° or 8°. 
Thus it is working at a very inefficient angle and will stall some few degrees 
sooner than the main planes. This fact is claimed by the enthusiasts for this 
type of design as its main advantage, since the stalling of the front surface will 
prevent the nose being raised any farther, and therefore the main planes will 
never reach the stalling angle. 
In the tail-less type, in which there is no separate surface either in front or 
behind, the wings must be heavily swept back, and there is a 'wash-out' or 
decrease in the angle of incidence as the wing tip is approached, so that these 
wing tips do, in effect, act in exactly the same way as the ordinary tail plane 
(Figs 5C and 5D). 
261 
STABILITY AND CONTROL 
Main plane 
Tail plane 
4° 
2° 
Fig 9.3 Longitudinal dihedral angle 
Lateral stability 
Lateral and directional stability will first be considered separately; then we 
shall try to see how they affect each other. 
To secure lateral stability we must so arrange things that when a slight roll 
takes place the forces acting on the aeroplane tend to restore it to an even keel. 
In all aeroplanes, when flying at a small angle of attack, there is a resistance 
to roll because the angle of attack, and so the lift, will increase on the down- 
going wing, and decrease on the up-going wing. But this righting effect will 
only last while the aeroplane is actually rolling. It must also be emphasised 
that this only happens while the angle of attack is small; if the angle of attack 
is near the stalling angle, then the increased angle on the falling wing may 
cause a decrease in lift, and the decreased angle on the other side an increase; 
thus the new forces will tend to roll the aeroplane still further, this being the 
cause of auto-rotation previously mentioned (Fig. 8.11). 
But the real test of stability is what happens after the roll has taken place. 
Dihedral angle 
The most common method of obtaining lateral stability is by the use of a dihe- 
dral angle on the main planes (Figs 9.4 and 9A). Dihedral angle is taken as 
being the angle between each plane and the horizontal, not the total angle 
between the two planes, which is really the geometrical meaning of dihedral 
angle. If the planes are inclined upwards towards the wing tips, the dihedral is 
positive; if downwards, it is negative and called anhedral (Fig. 9B, overleaf); 
the latter arrangement is used in practice for reasons of dynamic stability. 
The effect of the dihedral angle in securing lateral stability is sometimes dis- 
missed by saying that if one wing tip drops the horizontal equivalent on that 
wing is increased and therefore the lift is increased, whereas the horizontal 
equivalent and the lift of the wing which rises is decreased, therefore obviously 
the forces will tend to right the aeroplane. 
Unfortunately, it is not all quite so obvious as that. 
Once the aircraft has stopped rolling, and provided it is still travelling 
straight ahead, the aerodynamic forces will be influenced only by the airstream 
passing over the aircraft. This will be identical for both wings and so no 
restoring moment will result. 
What, then, is the real explanation as to why a dihedral angle is an aid to 
lateral stability? When the wings are both equally inclined the resultant lift on 
the wings is vertically upwards and will exactly balance the weight. If, 
however, one wing becomes lower than the other (Fig. 9.5), then the resultant 
lift on the wings will be slightly inclined in the direction of the lower wing, 
while the weight will remain vertical. Therefore the two forces will not 
262 MECHANICS OF FLIGHT 
263 
STABILITY AND CONTROL 
ß 
ß° = Dihedral angle 
ß 
Fig 9.4 Lateral dihedral angle 
Fig 9A Dihedral 
Pronounced dihedral is evident on this Spitfire: a very late post-war model. 
12L 
1 
2L 
Fig 9.5 Equal lift produced by each wing -- no rolling moment due to roll 
balance each other and there will be a small resultant force acting in a side- 
ways and downwards direction. This force is temporarily unbalanced and 
therefore the aeroplane will move in the direction of this force -- i.e. it will 
sideslip (Fig 9.6) -- and this will cause a flow of air in the opposite direction to 
the slip. This has the effect of increasing the angle of attack of the lower plane 
and increasing that of the upper plane. The lower plane will therefore produce 
more lift and a restoring moment will result. Also the wing tip of the lower 
plane will become, as it were, the leading edge so far as the slip is concerned; 
and just as the centre of pressure across the chord is nearer the leading edge, 
so the centre of the pressure distribution along the span will now be on the 
lower plane; for both these reasons the lower plane will receive more lift, and 
after a slight slip sideways the aeroplane will roll back into its proper position. 
As a matter of fact, owing to the protection of the fuselage, it is probable that 
the flow of air created by the sideslip will not reach a large portion of the 
raised wing at all; this depends very much on the position of the wing relative 
to the fuselage. 
Both the leading edge effect on the lower wing, and the shielding of the 
upper wing by the fuselage, occur on nearly all types of aircraft, and may well 
mean that an aeroplane has a sufficient degree of lateral stability without any 
dihedral angle, or too much if some of the following effects also apply. Even if 
there is no actual dihedral angle on the wings, these other methods of 
achieving lateral stability may be described as having a 'dihedral effect'. 
264 MECHANICS OF FLIGHT 
Fig 9B Anhedral 
Like this Ilyushin IL-76, many aircraft with high-mounted swept wings are 
given a significant amount of anhedral. This is primarily used to counteract 
the Dutch roll tendency, a form of dynamic instability involving coupled 
roll and yaw motions. 
High wing and low centre of gravity 
If the wings are placed in a high position and the centre of gravity is corre- 
spondingly low, the lateral stability can be enhanced. When an aircraft 
sideslips, the lift on the lower wing becomes greater than that on the higher 
one. Furthermore, a small sideways drag force is introduced. In consequence, 
the resultant force on the wing will be in the general direction indicated in Fig. 
9.7. You will see that this force does not now pass through the centre of 
gravity so there will be a small moment which will tend to roll the aircraft 
back to a level condition. This will occur even on a low-wing aircraft, but is 
more effective with a high wing because the moment arm is greater. For this 
reason a high-wing aircraft requires less dihedral than a low-wing type. 
265 
STABILITY AND CONTROL 
Direction of 
resulting sideslip 
Lift 
Weight 
Fig 9.6 The production of a sideslip 
Direction of 
sideslip 
Resulting aerodynamic 
force 
Wind due 
to sideslip 
W 
Fig 9.7 High wing and low centre of gravity 
266 MECHANICS OF FLIGHT 
Fig 9C Sweepback 
An Airbus A330 showing the sweepback of the wings. 
Higher aspect ratio and 
more lift on 
this wing 
Sideslip 
Direction of airflow 
Direction of airflow 
due to sideslip 
Effective 
span 
span 
Direction of
motion
Direction ofmot 
ion 
Effective 
due to sideslip 
Fig 9.8 Sweepback and lateral stability 
Sweepback and lateral stability 
A considerable angle of sweepback (Fig. 9C) will in itself promote lateral stab- 
ility, for, supposing the left wing to drop, as in the two previous cases, there will 
be a sideslip to the left and the left-hand wing will present, in effect, a higher 
aspect ratio than the right wing to the correcting airflow (Fig. 9.8). It will there- 
fore receive more lift and, as before, recovery will take place after sideslip. 
A forward sweep is sometimes used but this is not for reasons of stability 
(Fig. 9D, overleaf). 
Fin area and lateral stability 
One factor which may have considerable influence on lateral stability is the 
position of the various side surfaces, such as the fuselage, fin and rudder, and 
wheels. All these will present areas at right angles to any sideslip, so there will 
be pressure upon them which, if they are high above the centre of gravity, will 
tend to restore the aeroplane to an even keel; this applies to many modern 
types which have a high tail plane on top of a high fin (Figs 9.9 and 9E, later) 
and such types may have anhedral on the main planes to counterbalance this 
effect and prevent too great a degree of lateral stability; but if the side surfaces 
are low the pressure on them will tend to roll the aircraft over still more (Figs 
9.10 and 9F, later) and so cause lateral instability, although this must be bal- 
anced against the effect of high wing compared with the CG position. 
The reader will have noticed that, whatever the method of obtaining lateral 
stability, correction only takes place after a sideslip towards the low wing. 
It is the sideslip that effects the directional stability. 
Directional stability 
We shall first try to consider directional stability by itself, if only as a means 
of convincing ourselves that the two are so interlinked one with the other that 
267 
STABILITY AND CONTROL 
Sideslip 
Correcting 
wind 
Fig 9.9 Effect of high fin on lateral stability 
268 MECHANICS OF FLIGHT 
Fig 9D Sweep forward (opposite) 
The Grumman X--29 research aircraft with forward-swept wings. Forward- 
swept wings have the same advantages in high-speed flight as swept-back 
wings, but give a better spanwise distribution of lift, leading to lower 
induced drag. 
Sideslip 
Upsetting 
wind 
Fig 9.10 Effect of low-slung fuselage and engine pods on lateral stability 
they cannot be disposed of separately. In order to establish directional stability 
we must ensure that, if the aeroplane is temporarily deflected from its course, 
it will, of its own accord, tend to return to that course again. This is almost 
entirely a question of the 'side surface' or 'fin area' which has already been 
mentioned when dealing with lateral stability, but here it is not a question of 
the relative height of this side surface, but whether it is in front of or behind 
the centre of gravity (Fig. 9F). When an aeroplane is flying in the normal way 
the airflow will approach it directly from the front, i.e. parallel to its longitu- 
dinal axis. Now imagine it to be deflected from its course as in Fig. 9.11 
overleaf; owing to its momentum it will for a short time tend to continue 
moving in its old direction, therefore the longitudinal axis will be inclined to 
the airflow, and a pressure will be created on all the side surfaces on one side 
of the aeroplane. 
If the turning effect of the pressures behind the centre of gravity is greater 
than the turning effect in front of the centre of gravity, the aeroplane will tend 
to its original course. 
If, on the other hand, the turning effect in front is greater than that behind, 
the aeroplane will turn still farther off its course. Notice that it is the turning 
effect or the moment that matters, and not the actual pressure; therefore it is 
not merely a question of how much side surface, but also of the distance from 
the centre of gravity of each side surface. For instance, a small fin at the end 
of a long fuselage may be just as effective in producing directional stability as 
a large fin at the end of a short fuselage. Also, there may sometimes be more 
side surface in the front than in the rear, but the rear surfaces will be at a 
greater distance. All the side surfaces of an aeroplane, including that presented 
by wings with dihedral, affect the directional stability, but to the fin is allotted 
269 
STABILITY AND CONTROL 
the particular task of finally adjusting matters and its area is settled accord- 
ingly. 
There is a very close resemblance between the directional stability of an 
aeroplane and the action of a weathercock which always turns into the wind; 
in fact, one often sees a model aeroplane used as a weathercock. The simile, 
however, should not be carried too far, and the student must remember that 
there are two essential differences between an aeroplane and a weathercock -- 
first, that an aeroplane is not only free to yaw, but also to move bodily side- 
ways; and secondly, that the 'wind', in the case of an aeroplane, is not the wind 
we speak of when on the ground, but the wind caused by the original motion 
of the aeroplane through the air. This point is emphasised because of the idea 
which sometimes exists that an aeroplane desires to turn head to wind. If such 
were the case, directional stability would be a very mixed blessing. 
270 MECHANICS OF FLIGHT 
Fig 9E High fin 
A massive high fin and pronounced anhedral are evident on the 
McDonnell Douglas C--17. 
Correcting 
force on fin 
Direction 
of motion 
direction of 
Temporary 
to momentum 
motion owing 
(a)( 
b) 
Fig 9.11 Directional stability 
(a) Before disturbance; (b) after disturbance 
271 
STABILITY AND CONTROL 
Fig 9F A classic flying boat 
(By courtesy of the General Dynamics Corporation, USA) 
The large side area of the hull was balanced, from the lateral stability point 
of view, by the dihedral on the main planes and the high fin at the rear. 
Fig 9G Fin and directional stability 
A Sukhoi Su-27 blasting down the runway with nosewheel lifting clear of the 
ground. Note the two large fins with dorsal extension below the tailplane. 
This aircraft displays exceptional manoeuvrability and control at low speed. 
Lateral and directional stability 
Now we are, at last, in a position to connect these two forms of stability -- the 
sideslip essential to lateral stability will cause an air pressure on the side sur- 
faces which have been provided for directional stability. The effect of this 
pressure will be to turn the nose into the relative wind, i.e. in this case, towards 
the direction of sideslip. The aeroplane, therefore, will turn off its original 
course and in the direction of the lower wing. It is rather curious to note that 
the greater the directional stability the greater will be the tendency to turn off 
course in a sideslip. This turn will cause the raised wing, now on the outside 
of the turn, to travel faster than the inner or lower wing, and therefore to 
obtain more lift and so bank the aeroplane still further. By this time the nose 
of the aeroplane has probably dropped and the fat is properly in the fire with 
all three stabilities involved! The best way of seeing all this happen in real life 
is to watch a model aeroplane flying on a gusty day; the light loading and slow 
speed of the model make it possible to watch each step in the proceedings, 
whereas in the full-sized aeroplane it all happens more quickly, and also the 
pilot usually interferes by using his controls. If, for instance, the left wing 
drops and he applies rudder so as to turn the machine to the right, he will 
probably prevent it from departing appreciably from its course. 
We can now explain the technique of turning an aeroplane. Suppose, when 
we want to turn to the left, instead of applying any rudder we simply bank the 
aeroplane to the left, as we have already seen it will slip inwards and turn to 
the left. That is all there is in it. So effective is this method that it is unneces- 
sary to use the rudder at all for turning purposes. So far as the yaw is 
concerned -- and a turn must involve a yaw -- the rudder (with the help of the 
fin) is still responsible, just as (with the help of the fin) it always was. The dif- 
ference is simply that the rudder and fin are brought into effect by the inward 
sideslip, instead of by application of rudder which tends to cause an outward 
skid. The pilot may do nothing about it, but the stability of the aeroplane puts 
a force on the rudder for him. It should also be emphasised that although it 
may be most practical, and most sensible, to commence a turn in certain air- 
craft without application of rudder, such a turn cannot be absolutely perfect; 
there must be an inward sideslip. The pilot may not notice it, the sideslip indi- 
cator may not detect it; but it is there just the same. 
Just as a slight roll results in a sideslip and then a yawing motion so if an 
aircraft moves in a yawed position, as in Fig. 9.11, that is if it moves crabwise 
(which is really the same thing as slipping or skidding) lateral stability will 
come into play and cause the aircraft to roll away from the leading wing. Thus 
a roll causes a yaw, and a yaw causes a roll, and the study of the two cannot 
be separated. 
If the stability characteristics of an aeroplane are such that it is very stable 
directionally and not very stable laterally, e.g. if it has large fin and rudder and 
little or no dihedral angle, or other 'dihedral effect', it will have a marked tend- 
272 MECHANICS OF FLIGHT 
ency to turn into a sideslip, and to bank at steeper and steeper angles, that it 
may get into an uncontrollable spiral -- this is sometimes called spiral insta- 
bility, but note that it is caused by too much stability (directional). 
If, on the other hand, the aeroplane is very stable laterally and not very 
stable directionally, it will sideslip without any marked tendency to turn 
into the sideslip. Such an aircraft is easily controllable by the rudder, and if 
the rudder only is used for a turn the aircraft will bank and make quite a 
nice turn. 
The reader will find it interesting to think out the other characteristics which 
these two extremes would cause in an aeroplane, but the main point to be 
emphasised is that too much stability (of any type) is almost as bad as too little 
stability. 
Control of an aeroplane 
Where an aeroplane is stable or unstable, it is necessary for the pilot to be able 
to control it, so that he can manoeuvre it into any desired position. 
Longitudinal control is provided by the elevators, i.e. flaps hinged behind 
the tail plane, or movement of the whole tail plane. 
Roll control is provided by the ailerons, i.e. flaps hinged at the rear of the 
aerofoils near each wing tip. 
Directional control is provided by the rudder, i.e. a vertical flap hinged to 
the stern post. 
The system of control is the same in each case, i.e. if the control surface is 
moved it will, in effect, alter the angle of attack and the camber of the com- 
plete surface, and therefore change the force upon it (see Fig. 9.12, overleaf). 
On many aircraft the roll can also be controlled by the use of spoilers. These 
are described in more detail later. 
The elevators and ailerons are controlled by movements of a control 
column on which is mounted a handwheel which is usually abbreviated to 
something rather like a car steering wheel with most of the rim sawn off to 
leave a pair of small handgrips or 'spectacles'. 
Pushing the control column forward lowers the elevators, thus increasing 
the lift on the tailplane and making the nose of the aircraft drop. Turning the 
handwheel anti-clockwise lowers the right hand aileron and raises the left, 
thus rolling the aircraft left-wing down. 
In old aircraft and aircraft such as fighter aircraft, where cockpit room is 
restricted, there is no handwheel and instead the control column moves to left 
and right as well as backwards and forwards -- the left-hand movement is 
equivalent to turning the handwheel anti-clockwise (left hand down). A small 
version of this type of 'joystick' control is now used on many aircraft. It resem- 
bles the kind of control stick used for model aircraft and computer games. It 
is placed to one side of the pilot, and consequently referred to as a side-stick. 
273 
STABILITY AND CONTROL 
The use of such a small control device is possible because the flight controls 
are fully power operated, and require no physical force from the pilot. 
The rudder is controlled by foot pedals. Pushing the left pedal forward 
deflects the rudder to the left and therefore turns the nose of the aircraft to the 
left. This can cause some problems amongst learner pilots as the movement is 
opposite to that of bicycle handlebars. 
In each instance it will be noticed that the control surfaces are placed as far 
as possible away from the centre of gravity so as to provide sufficient leverage 
to alter the position of the aeroplane. 
On modern aircraft there may also be a secondary set of inboard ailerons 
which are used in high speed flight where the outboard surfaces could produce 
excessively large rolling moments, or unacceptable structural loading or wing 
twist. 
Balanced controls 
Nowadays most larger aircraft have powered controls, but on smaller aircraft 
and older types, manual controls are still used. It is perhaps surprising to find 
that executive jets and even some small regional jet airliners retain manual 
controls. It should be remembered, however, that aircraft often remain in 
service for many decades, and quite recent models may only be updated vari- 
ants of very old designs. The following description applies to manual controls, 
which are the type that student pilots will initially have to deal with. 
Although, in general, the forces which the pilot has to exert in order to 
move the controls are small, the continuous movement required in bumpy 
weather becomes tiring during long flights, especially when the control sur- 
faces are large and the speeds fairly high. For this reason controls are often 
balanced, or, more correctly, partially balanced (Fig. 9H). 
Several methods have been employed for balancing control surfaces. Figure 
9.13 shows what is perhaps the most simple kind of aerodynamic balance. The 
274 MECHANICS OF FLIGHT 
Aileron 
Elevators 
Rudder 
Rudder 
Aileron 
Fin 
Airflow 
deflected 
Force created by 
application of rudder 
Fig 9.12 Control surfaces 
hinge is set back so that the air striking the surface in front of the hinge causes 
a force which tends to make the control move over still farther; this partially 
balances the effect of the air which strikes the rear portion. This is effective but 
it must not be overdone; over-balancing is dangerous since it may remove all 
feel of the control from the pilot. It must be remembered that when the control 
surface is set a small angle, the centre of pressure on the surface is well forward 
of the centre of the area, and if at any angle the centre of pressure is in front 
of the hinge it will tend to take the control out of the pilot's hands (or feet). 
Usually not more than one-fifth of the surface may be in front of the hinge. 
275 
STABILITY AND CONTROL 
Fig 9H Balanced controls and tabs 
(By courtesy of SAAB, Sweden) 
Twin-jet training aircraft showing the statically and aerodynamically 
balanced ailerons with geared servo-tabs; starboard tab adjustable for 
trimming. Elevators and rudder are also balanced, and there is a trim tab 
on the rudder, and a servo-tab (adjustable for trimming) on each elevator. 
Hinge 
Force on balanced 
portion helps control 
to move 
Fig 9.13 Aerodynamic balance 
Figures 9.14 and 9.15 show two practical applications of this type of 
balance; in each some part of the surface is in front of the hinge, and each has 
its advantages. 
Figure 9.16 shows the servo type of balance which differs in principle since 
the pilot in this case only moves the small extra surface (in the opposite direc- 
tion to normal), and, owing to the leverage, the force on the small surface 
helps to move the main control in the required direction. It is, in effect, a 
system of gearing. 
Perhaps the chief interest in the servo system of balance is that it was the 
forerunner of the balancing tabs and trimming tabs. The development of these 
control tabs was very rapid and formed an interesting little bit of aviation 
history. 
The servo system suffered from many defects, but it did show how powerful 
is the effect of a small surface used to deflect the air in the opposite direction 
to that in which it is desired to move the control surface. 
276 MECHANICS OF FLIGHT 
Fig 9.14 Horn balance 
Fig 9.15 Inset hinge balance 
Pulley 
Controls from 
rudder bar 
Servo 
rudder 
Servo 
rudder 
Main 
rudder 
NEUTRAL 
POSITION 
'RIGHT' 
RUDDER 
Pilot applies 
'right' rudder 
Force on 
servo rudder 
Fig 9.16 Servo system of balance 
The next step was to apply this idea to an aileron when a machine was 
inclined to fly with one wing lower than the other. A strip of flexible metal was 
attached to the trailing edge of the control surface and produced the necessary 
corrective bias. 
So far, the deflection of the air was only in one direction and so we obtained 
a bias on the controls rather than a balancing system. The next step gave us 
both balance and bias; the strip of metal became a tab, i.e. an actual flap 
hinged to the control surface. This tab was connected by a link to a fixed 
surface (the tail plane, fin or main plane), the length of this link being 
adjustable on the ground. When the main control surface moved in one direc- 
tion, the tab moved in the other and thus experienced a force which tended to 
help the main surface to move -- hence the balance. By adjusting the link, the 
tab could be set to give an initial force in one direction or the other -- hence 
the bias. 
Sometimes a spring is inserted between the tab and the main control system. 
The spring may be used to modify the system in two possible ways -- 
1. So that the amount of tab movement decreases with speed, thus pre- 
venting the action being too violent at high speeds. 
2. So that the tab does not operate at all until the main control surface has 
been moved through a certain angle, or until a certain control force is 
exerted. 
Tabs of this kind are called spring tabs. 
The final step (Figs 9.17 and 9.18, overleaf) required a little mechanical inge- 
nuity, but otherwise it was a natural development. The pilot was given the 
means of adjusting the bias while in the air, and thus he was enabled to 
correct any flying faults, or out-of-balance effects, as and when they 
occurred. 
On small aircraft with manual controls these tabs may be fitted to all of the 
primary control surfaces. The pilot can adjust their settings from within the 
cockpit and can thereby arrange the trim so that the aircraft will fly 'hands- 
off' in almost any flight conditions. On aircraft with power-operated controls, 
such tabs are unnecessary and the trim wheels are simply used to reset the 
neutral or hands-off position of either the control column or the actuator 
system. From the pilot's point of view this feels almost exactly like setting a 
trim tab. 
277 
STABILITY AND CONTROL 
278 MECHANICS OF FLIGHT 
Cable Fabric 
Metal strip 
Rigid link adjustable 
on ground 
Tab setting adjustable 
by pilot in the air 
Fig 9.17 Evolution of control tabs 
Trim tab-control cables 
connected to hand 
wheel in cockpit 
Rudder control cables 
connected to rudder bar 
in cockpit 
Rudder torque rod 
Rudder control-cable 
wheel 
Fig 9.18 Control tabs 
Mass balance 
Control surfaces are often balanced in quite a different sense. A mass is fitted 
in front of the hinge. This is partly to provide a mechanical balancing of the 
mass of the control surface behind the hinge but may also be partly to help 
prevent an effect known as 'flutter' which is liable to occur at high speeds (Fig. 
9.19). This flutter is a vibration which is caused by the combined effects of the 
changes in pressure distribution over the surface as the angle of attack is 
altered, and the elastic forces set up by the distortion of the structure itself. All 
structures are distorted when loads are applied. If the structure is elastic, as all 
good structures must be, it will tend to spring back as soon as the load is 
removed, or changes its point of application. In short, a distorted structure is 
like a spring that has been wound up and is ready to spring back. An aero- 
plane wing or fuselage can be distorted in two ways, by bending and by 
twisting, and each distortion can result in an independent vibration. Like all 
vibrations, this flutter is liable to become dangerous if the two effects add up. 
The flutter may affect the control surfaces such as an aileron, or the main 
planes, or both. The whole problem is very complicated, but we do know of 
two features which help to prevent it -- a stiff structure and mass balance of 
the control surfaces. When the old types of aerodynamic balance were used, 
e.g. the inset hinge or horn balance, the mass could be concealed inside the 
forward portion of the control surface and thus two birds were killed with one 
stone; but when the tap type of balance is used alone the mass must be placed 
on a special arm sticking out in front of the control surface. In general, 
however, the problems of flutter are best tackled by increasing the rigidity of 
the structure and control-system components. 
Large aircraft and military types now invariably have powered controls and 
these are much less sensitive to problems of flutter as the actuating system is 
very rigid. 
Perhaps it should be emphasised that the mass is not simply a weight for the 
purpose of balancing the control surface statically, e.g. to keep the aileron 
floating when the control mechanism is not connected; it may have this effect, 
but it also serves to alter the moments of inertia of the surface, and thus alter 
the period of vibration and the liability to flutter. It may help to make this clear 
279 
STABILITY AND CONTROL 
Auxiliary 
mass 
Main plane 
Hinge 
Aileron 
Fig 9.19 Mass balance 
if we realise that mass balance is just as effective on a rudder, where the weight 
is not involved, as on an elevator or aileron. 
On old military biplane aircraft, the exact distribution of mass on the 
control surfaces was so important that strict orders had to be introduced 
concerning the application of paint and dope to these surfaces. It is for this 
reason that the red, white and blue stripes which used to be painted on the 
rudders of Royal Air Force machines were removed (they were later restored, 
but only on the fixed fin), and why the circles on the wings were not allowed 
to overlap the ailerons. Rumour has it that when this order was first prom- 
ulgated, some units in their eagerness to comply with the order, but ignorant 
as to its purpose, painted over the circles and stripes with further coats of 
dope! 
Control at low speeds 
We now turn our attention to an important and interesting problem -- namely, 
that of control at low speeds or, what amounts to the same thing, at large 
angles of attack. It is obviously of little use to enable a machine to fly slowly 
unless we can ensure that the pilot will still have adequate control over it (Fig. 
9J).Let us first state the problem by giving an example. Suppose, owing to 
engine failure, a pilot has to make a forced landing. If he is inexperienced -- 
and indeed it has been known to happen to pilots of considerable experience 
280 MECHANICS OF FLIGHT 
Fig 9I Tab control mechanism 
(By courtesy of Piaggio, Genoa, Italy) 
-- he will often tend to stall his aeroplane in an attempt to reach a distant field 
or to climb over some obstacle. Now the use of slots or flaps may postpone 
the stall, may help him to obtain lift at slow speeds, but they will not give him 
what he most needs -- namely, efficient control. 
In the first place, owing to the decreased speed of the airflow over all the 
control surfaces, the forces acting on them will be less and they will feel 
'sloppy'. But this is not all. Suppose while he is thus flying near the stalling 
angle he decides that he must turn to the left, he will move the control column 
over to the left (which will cause the right aileron to go down and the left one 
to go up), at the same time applying left rudder. The rudder will make a feeble 
effort to turn the aeroplane to the left; but what will be the effect of the move- 
ment of the ailerons? 
The effect of the right aileron going down should be to increase the lift on 
the right wing, but in practice it may decrease it, since it may increase the angle 
of attack beyond that angle which gives the greatest lift. But what is quite 
certain is that the drag will be considerably increased on the right wing, so 
tending to pull the aeroplane round to the right. This yawing effect, caused by 
the ailerons, is present at nearly all angles of attack, but it becomes particu- 
larly marked near the stalling angle; it is called aileron drag. 
Meanwhile, what of the left wing? The lift may either have decreased or 
increased according to the exact angle of attack, but in any case the change in 
lift will be small. The drag, on the other hand, will almost certainly have 
decreased as the aileron moved upwards. To sum it all up, the result of the 
281 
STABILITY AND CONTROL 
Fig 9J Control at low speed 
The massive bulk of the Antonov AN-124 in a tight turn at low speed and 
low altitude. This photograph was taken from the ground! 
pilot's attempt to turn to the left is that there may or may not be a slight tend- 
ency to roll into the left bank required for an ordinary left-hand turn, while at 
the same time the drag on the wings will produce a strong tendency to turn to 
the right which may completely overcome the rudder's efforts in the opposite 
direction (9.20). The conditions are, in fact, very favourable for a spin (both 
literally and metaphorically); the pilot could hardly have done better had he 
deliberately attempted to get the aeroplane into a spin. 
So much for the problem. What solution can be found? We must endeavour 
to ensure that when the stalling angle is reached, or even exceeded, the move- 
ment of the controls by the pilot will cause the same effect on the aeroplane as 
in normal flight. The following improvements would all help to attain this end -- 
1. Increased turning effect from the rudder. 
2. Down-going aileron should not increase the drag. 
3. Up-going aileron should increase the drag. 
4. Down-going aileron should increase the lift at all angles. 
5. Up-going aileron should cause a loss of lift at all angles. 
A large number of practical devices have been tried out in the attempt to 
satisfy these conditions; most of them have been partially successful, but none 
of them has solved the problem completely. 
Let us consider a few of these and see to what extent they meet our requirements. 
(a) The use of very large rudders with sufficient power to overcome the 
yawing effect of the ailerons in the wrong direction. 
The disadvantage is that the size of the rudder required to obtain the 
desired result is excessive for normal flight. Also this seems to be a method 
282 MECHANICS OF FLIGHT 
Force on 
rudder 
Aileron 
up 
Aileron 
down 
Increased drag 
opposing turn 
Direction in which 
pilot attempts 
to turn 
Fig 9.20 Result of an attempt to turn at large angles of attack 
of tackling the problem from the wrong standpoint -- instead of curing the 
disease, it allows the disease to remain while endeavouring to make the 
patient strong enough to withstand it. 
(b)Awash-out, or decrease of the angle of incidence, towards the wing tips. 
This will mean that when the centre portions of the wings are at their 
stalling angle, the outer portions are well below the angle, and therefore 
the aileron will function in the normal way. The defect of this arrangement 
is that the wash-out must be considerable to have any appreciable effect 
on the control, and the result will be a corresponding loss of lift from the 
outer portions of the wing in normal flight. The same effect can be 
obtained by rigging up the ailerons so that the trailing edge of the ailerons 
is above the trailing edge of the wing. 
(c) 'Frise', or other specially shaped ailerons (Fig. 9.21). This is a patented 
device, the idea being so to shape the aileron that when it is moved down- 
wards the complete top surface of the main plane and the aileron will have 
a smooth, uninterrupted contour causing very little drag, but when it is 
moved upwards the aileron, which is of the balanced variety, will project 
below the bottom surface of the main plane and cause excessive drag. This 
method has the great advantage of being simple, and it undoubtedly serves 
to decrease the bad yawing effect of the ailerons, and therefore it is often 
used. Unfortunately, its effects are not drastic enough. 
(d) Differential ailerons (Fig. 9.22). Here, again, is a delightfully simple device 
suffering only from the same defect that, although it provides a step in the 
right direction, it does not go far enough to satisfy our needs. Instead of 
the two ailerons moving equally up and down, a simple mechanical 
arrangement of the controls causes the aileron which moves upwards to 
move through a larger angle than the aileron which moves downwards, 
the idea being to increase the drag and decrease the lift on the wing with 
the up-going aileron, while at the same time the down-going aileron, 
owing to its smaller movement, will not cause excessive drag. 
283 
STABILITY AND CONTROL 
Fig 9.21 Frise ailerons 
Large 
upward 
movement 
Small 
downward 
movement 
Fig 9.22 Differential ailerons 
(e) Slot-cum-aileron control (Fig. 9.23). The slots, which need only be at the 
outer portions of the wings in front of the ailerons, may be of the auto- 
matic type, or the slot may be interconnected to the aileron in such a way 
that when the aileron is lowered the slot is opened, while when the aileron 
is raised, or in its neutral position, the slot is closed. By this means the 
down-going aileron will certainly serve to increase the lift for several 
degrees beyond the stalling angle, nor will the drag on this wing become 
very large since the open slot will lessen the formation of eddies. We shall 
therefore obtain a greater tendency to roll in the right direction and less 
tendency to yaw in the wrong direction. This is exactly what is required, 
and the system proved to be very effective in practice. 
(f) Spoiler control (Fig. 9.24). Spoilers are long narrow plates normally fitted 
to the upper surface of the wing though they may occasionally be fitted 
below as well. In the ordinary way they lie flush with the surface, or even 
inside it, and have no effect on the performance of the aerofoil, but they 
can be connected to the aileron controls in such a way that when an 
aileron is moved up beyond a certain angle the spoiler is raised at a large 
angle to the airflow, or comes up through a slit, causing turbulence, 
decrease in lift and increase in drag. This means that the wing on which 
the aileron goes down gets more lift, and very little extra drag, while on 
the other wing the lift is 'spoilt' and the drag greatly increased. Thus we 
have a large rolling effect in the right direction combined with a yawing 
effect, also in the right direction -- just what the doctor ordered. 
This is what we aimed at, and there is the further advantage that the mechan- 
ical operation of the spoiler is easy, since the forces acting upon it are small. 
This method of control feels strange to the pilot who is unaccustomed to it 
because the loss of lift caused by the spoiler will result in a decided drop of 
that wing, which may be alarming when near the ground. But any such 
strangeness can soon be overcome and the pilot begins to realise the advan- 
tages of maintaining good lateral control, up to and beyond the normal 
stalling angle. The improvement in manoeuvrability is particularly noticeable 
284 MECHANICS OF FLIGHT 
Aileron down, 
slot open, increased 
lift 
Aileron up, 
slot closed 
Spoiler retracted 
good lift, small drag 
Spoiler raised 
large drag, very poor lift 
Lift 
Fig 9.23 Slot-cum-aileron control Fig 9.24 Spoiler control 
when the aeroplane approaches its ceiling. But, whatever its merits, the spoiler 
took a long time to become popular as a means of control, though it was, and 
is, used extensively as an air brake. 
It is rather curious that we have been describing the use of spoilers as an aid 
to lateral control at low speeds; and this indeed was their original purpose, but 
in many types of modern aircraft it is at high speed that the aileron control 
may result in undesirable characteristics caused by compressibility as discussed 
in Chapter 11. Modern airliners use a complicated arrangement of spoilers 
combined with more than one set of ailerons. The control system normally 
automatically selects the correct combination according to flight speed. 
It may be noticed that the elevator control has not been mentioned in 
dealing with this problem; the elevators usually remain fairly efficient, even at 
low speeds, since the angle of attack of the tail plane is less than that of the 
main planes, and therefore there is not the same tendency to stall as with the 
ailerons. However, on high-speed aircraft, the tail plane has to be able to com- 
pensate for the rearward movement of the centre of lift of the wing and it is 
quite common nowadays for the whole tail plane to be movable in addition to 
having a hinged elevator. On propeller-driven aircraft, the extra speed of the 
slipstream normally adds to the effectiveness of both rudder and elevators. 
Before leaving the subject of control it should be mentioned that large 
amounts of sweepback, and even more delta-shaped wings, cause control 
problems of their own, but since wings of these shapes are nearly always on 
high-speed aircraft, their consideration will be left to a later chapter. 
Powered controls 
Nowadays all but small aircraft are usually fitted with power-actuated control 
surfaces which are very easy to operate even on large airliners. Because such 
controls offer virtually no natural resistance, they are given some form of arti- 
ficial 'feel', a resistance which is designed to increase with flight speed (or more 
precisely with dynamic pressure) so that the control system feels like a direct 
mechanical linkage. Without such feel it would be quite literally possible to 
pull the control surfaces off at high speed. 
The control column often incorporates a 'stick shaker' which operates 
when the aircraft approaches a stalled condition. This reproduces the shaking 
that normally occurs on simple mechanical systems due to the buffeting of the 
control surfaces caused by turbulence. It is intended to trigger the pilot's con- 
ditioned response. On some aircraft, if the pilot fails to respond correctly by 
pushing the column forward, the controls take over and a 'stick pusher' does 
the job for him! With the advent of advanced and reliable electronic devices, 
it has become possible to make control systems of immense complexity that 
respond smoothly over a very wide range of flight conditions and contain 
many built-in safety features. In order to prevent loss of control in the event 
285 
STABILITY AND CONTROL 
of power failure the systems are usually duplicated, triplicated or even quadru- 
pled. 
Dynamic stability 
In this chapter we have dealt mainly with what is known as static stability. 
There are other forms of instability that the designer (and the pilot) has to 
cope with. These take the form of oscillations or deviations from the desired 
flight path that vary with time, and are known as dynamic instabilities. They 
can be a nuisance, nauseating or downright dangerous if left unchecked. An 
example is the spiral instability referred to earlier in this chapter. 
A full description of dynamic stability is beyond the scope of this book, but 
the reader should be aware that the problems of stability and control are far 
more complex than the simple outline given here. 
Can you answer these? 
Questions on stability and control -- 
1. What would be the characteristics of an aircraft with extreme directional 
stability and little lateral stability? 
2. What would be the characteristics of an aircraft with extreme lateral stab- 
ility and little directional stability? 
3. What is the object of balancing controls? 
4. Distinguish between 'mass' balance and 'aerodynamic' balance. 
5. Explain the difficulty of obtaining satisfactory lateral control at large 
angles of attack. 
6. Describe some of the methods which have been tried with a view to over- 
coming this difficulty. 
7. Explain why spoilers are sometimes used at low speeds, and sometimes at 
high speeds, as an aid to lateral control. 
For solutions see Appendix 5. 
286 MECHANICS OF FLIGHT 
In the preceding chapters I have tried to explain the principles on which the 
flight of an aeroplane depends. However, flying an aeroplane is a different 
thing altogether and in this chapter we will explore what it is actually like to 
fly a light, low-speed aircraft of the sort that most pilots use when they start 
their training. During the flight we will use the knowledge we have gained pre- 
viously to explain what is happening. 
The aircraft we will fly is shown in Fig. 10A. It is a simple aircraft with 
fixed undercarriage and a fixed pitch propeller driven by a piston engine. Let 
us have a quick look in the cockpit to see the instruments and controls (Fig. 
10B, overleaf). First we notice the main flying instruments -- an air-speed indi- 
cator (ASI, calibrated in knots), an altimeter (calibrated in ft), a rate of climb 
A trial flight 
CHAPTER10 
Fig 10A Cessna 152, the aircraft for our flight 
indicator (ft/min), and a turn and slip indicator (Fig. 8.6). Then we have an 
artificial horizon and a direction indicator (DI). Finally, tucked away at the top 
of the windshield, we have a small magnetic compass. 
Next we come to the engine and fuel instruments; the tachometer, which 
measures the engine speed, is situated on the right hand side of the cockpit, 
then comes the ammeter (which shows if our electrical generator is working 
properly) and next to this is a suction gauge. The suction gauge is needed 
because the artificial horizon and the DI are gyroscopic instruments, which 
derive their power from engine-supplied suction. If the suction drops below a 
certain level, these instruments will become unreliable as the gyroscopes slow 
down and we need warning if this is likely to happen! Under the cluster of 
main flight instruments we find the fuel gauges (one for each wing tank) and 
indicators for engine temperature and oil pressure. 
The flying controls are quite simple. In front of us is the main yoke. We 
push this forward to lower the elevators and nose of the aircraft, or pull to 
raise the nose. We turn the 'wheel' to operate the ailerons and bank the air- 
craft to left or right. At our feet are the pedals, which are used to operate the 
rudder, and above the pedals the toe-operated differential brakes are situated. 
On a quadrant, in front of us, there is the flap lever and position indicator. On 
this aircraft the flaps are electrically operated and so they will not work until 
the electrical supply is turned on. 
288 MECHANICS OF FLIGHT 
Fig 10B The cockpit 
The engine controls are quite simple. A push-pull throttle control is pro- 
vided on the dashboard -- push forward to increase engine revs. Apart from 
this there is a mixture control to compensate for the reduced air density as we 
climb and a carburettor heat control which we use, particularly at reduced 
engine speeds, to prevent the carburettor icing up -- possibly with disastrous 
results! As we will only be flying at or below 3000 ft, we will leave the mixture 
at rich until we eventually want to stop the engine. 
To complete the story we need to take a quick look at the navigational 
equipment. On this aircraft we have a communications radio, a navigational 
radio (which we shall not use, as we are flying in good visibility and not far 
from the airfield) and a transponder to allow Air Traffic Control to track our 
position. Under the fuel gauges and engine instruments is the key-operated 
switch for the magnetos and engine starter (rather like the ignition switch on 
a car), together with the light switches and pitot heater switch. Like the car- 
burettor heater, this prevents the formation of ice but this time on the 
pitot-static tube, which is vital if we are going to know our correct airspeed. 
There is also a master switch, which isolates all the electrical systems apart 
from the magnetos. These provide the spark at the spark plugs and keep the 
engine running. If there is an electrical fault and we have to switch off the 
master, at least the engine will not stop! 
So far we have spent a long time and the aircraft has not even moved yet. 
Well, that's flying! If something goes wrong in a car you can always pull off 
the road to sort it out. With an aeroplane we have to make sure everything is 
OK before we start off. 
Pre-flight checks 
Again, unlike a car, we cannot just throw our cases into the back and hope for 
the best. The basic aircraft is carefully weighed so that the weight and position 
of the centre of gravity are both known. We have to worry about the move- 
able weights and do weight and balance calculations for the loads we are 
carrying on this flight. Every aircraft has a flight manual and it is this that will 
tell us if our loading is within safe limits for the aircraft. We are not going far 
-- we will be in uncontrolled airspace and visibility and forecast are good, so 
we will not need to file a flight plan. It is still a good idea to plan what we 
intend to do, though. Runway in current use is 22L (the 22 means the heading 
is about 2200 on the DI), so we will take off southwest towards the city, turn 
left towards the east before we get to the built-up area and try some turns, 
stalls and a few other manoeuvres. We will then rejoin the circuit and land -- 
a total flight time of perhaps 50 minutes. 
Now for our detailed pre-flight checks. We first inspect the paperwork to 
make sure our particular aircraft has up-to-date service records, insurance, etc. 
Taking our checklist, we then go to the aircraft. First we switch off the radios 
289 
A TRIAL FLIGHT 
and then switch on the master switch and the switches for all the systems we 
are going to test -- the flashing anti-collision beacon, the navigation lights, the 
landing lights and the pitot heater. We walk round the aircraft, checking that 
all these systems are working, then we return to the cockpit and test the flaps 
before switching everything off again. 
Now we walk slowly round the aircraft, checking such things as the con- 
dition of the tyres and brakes, the condition of the surfaces, the control hinges, 
etc. We also make sure that, when we waggle the controls, the main yoke 
moves in the correct direction -- misrigging has been known! As we come to 
the leading edge of the starboard wing we notice a small hole. This is the stall- 
warning device. As an aerofoil approaches the stall the suction at the leading 
edge gets stronger. The stall warning device sounds a buzzer in the cockpit 
when the aerofoil is dangerously close to the stall. We test that this is working 
by sucking gently at the hole. Now we are at the nose we check the engine oil 
level and the condition of the propeller. We must also check the fuel. First we 
take samples to make sure it has not been contaminated by water and then we 
clamber on to a step on the strut of each wing in turn to dip the tank and make 
sure we have enough fuel for the flight -- the electrical gauges may fail and 
there are no filling stations at 3000 ft. Clearly the last pilot filled it up before 
he parked it, so we do not have to worry about a trip to the pumps. 
Nearly there now! We get into the cockpit, plug our headsets in ready for 
use and check that the instruments and controls are all in good condition and 
the first aid and fire extinguisher are to hand and in date. Then we adjust the 
seats and strap ourselves in. Time to start the engine. Fuel on, three strokes of 
the primer as the engine is cold, mixture rich, carburettor heat cold, throttle 
to idle, master switch and anti-collision beacon on, check that no circuit 
breakers have popped out, open the window and shout, 'Clear prop' as a 
warning to the unwary and then turn the key and slowly push the throttle 
forward. As the engine starts we check that the starter motor has disengaged, 
that the oil pressure is rising satisfactorily, that the ammeter is reading satis- 
factorily and that the vacuum gauge is reading in the green area. Now we set 
the engine speed to 1200 rpm, put on our headsets, make sure the intercom is 
switched on and that we can hear each other. 
A few checks still to do. I told you flying was a thorough business. 
Magnetos are duplicated for safety, so we make sure that the engine will run 
happily on either one before returning the switch to both on. Now we set the 
DI to agree with the magnetic compass and the altimeter to read the approxi- 
mate height of the airfield (200 ft). Then if we do forget to set it later on it will 
not be too far out. In this flight we will be measuring altitude with respect to 
mean sea level (known as QNH). The engine temperature now looks OK and 
it is time to contact the tower. We are told that runway 22 is in use, that the 
surface wind is 8 knots from 270o and that the QNH is 1009.0 millibars 
(remember them?). We repeat back the information, check the altimeter setting 
and now we are ready to taxi to the runway. 
290 MECHANICS OF FLIGHT 
Taxying 
Our aircraft is parked into wind. We pull back on the yoke to lighten the load 
on the nose wheel and push the throttle forward until we start to move. More 
checks now. Do the brakes work? We throttle back and try them, repeating for 
both left hand and right hand control positions. Now we park into wind for 
the power checks. First we check that oil pressure and temperature are OK. 
Next set 1700 rpm and make sure these remain within limits and another 
check on the magnetos before making sure the engine does not quit when we 
set it to idle. 
Now we are almost ready. We make a final check that all switches are set 
correctly, the flaps are up, mixture rich and carburettor heat off and another 
quick check to see the controls move correctly as we pull back for the eleva- 
tors and turn the wheel for the ailerons. Now, at last, we can taxi to the 
holding point on the runway. As we taxi we position the ailerons to keep the 
into-wind wing down and the elevators set to reduce the load on the nose 
wheel as much as possible. At the holding point we stop to tell the tower that 
we are about to line up on runway 22L, look for any aircraft on the approach, 
release the brakes and line up on the runway centre line. 
Take off 
Engine to 2000 rpm and a quick final check on engine and instruments, release 
brakes and throttle fully forward. A quick glance to make sure the ASI regis- 
ters the increasing speed and, as the aircraft gathers speed, we use the pedals 
to counter any swing and keep the nose pointing down the runway. The con- 
trols begin to become more effective as the speed increases, so we ease the 
ailerons and the backpressure on the elevators. As the speed reaches 55 knots, 
we pull back gently and now we are climbing away at full throttle and adjust 
the elevators to give a steady climbing speed of 60 knots, close to the speed 
that gives us the best angle of climb, to clear any obstacles. 
Once things have settled down, to remove the force on the yoke, we trim, 
using the trim wheel that operates a small tab on the right hand elevator, and 
wait until the altimeter shows that we are 500 ft above the airfield. Then we 
push forward slightly and settle to 70 knots (the speed for best rate of climb) 
and retrim, keeping the horizon at a constant position in the windscreen. It 
might seem odd to increase the rate of climb by lowering the nose and 
increasing the speed but a quick glance at the vertical speed indicator shows 
that we are, in fact, climbing faster than before. It will be a good idea to look 
again at Chapter 7, when we get down, to work out the reason why. 
291 
A TRIAL FLIGHT 
Some simple exercises 
Now we are properly airborne, it is time to leave the airfield and try a few 
manoeuvres. We start by banking about 10° to the left to make a gentle turn 
on to a course of 90°. We are now approaching 3000 ft and need to level off 
into straight and level flight. Nose down, let the speed build and, as our 
cruising speed of 90 knots approaches, we gently throttle back to the cruise 
engine setting of 2300 rpm. Finally, when things are nicely settled, we use the 
trim to remove the control force and find the aircraft flies quite happily 'hands 
off'. Every 15 minutes or so we do the 'FREDA' checks to make sure that all 
is well: 
Fuel -- have we got enough? 
Radios -- on correct frequencies? 
Engine -- temperature and pressures OK? Pull out the carburettor heat to the 
on position and check for a small fall in engine speed and a return to the pre- 
vious speed when the carburettor heat is turned off. This check ensures that 
we haven't inadvertently started icing up the engine. 
Direction finder -- does it read the same as the magnetic compass? (The DF is 
a gyroscopic instrument and tends to drift slightly with time). 
Altimeter -- is it set correctly and are we at the correct height? 
Checks complete. Now to try a few manoeuvres. First we pull back slightly. 
After an initial climb, the aircraft settles to a lower speed of 86 knots. We can 
reset the throttle to remove the subsequent tendency to slowly gain height but 
as we were flying fairly near the minimum power setting, not much movement 
is necessary. To speed up we do the opposite; yoke forward and increase 
throttle slightly to prevent sink. Unlike a car, we do not use the throttle as the 
speed control, although it may need some slight adjustment. The main thing is 
to control the angle of attack with the elevators -- pull back to slow up and 
push forward to increase speed. 
Now let's try a descent to 2500 ft. Throttle back to 1500 rpm. When we do 
this we have to remember that carburettor icing can be a real danger, even on 
a fairly hot day. We don't want the engine quitting on us; we have only got 
one! So we pull on the carburettor heat control, which directs the engine air 
over the hot exhaust manifold, before it enters the carburettor. We need some 
slight control input to cope with the change in engine torque and the change 
in pitching moment, due to its offset thrust line. When we have settled into a 
steady descent (a descent rate of about 500 ft/min on the rate of climb indi- 
cator) we can again trim the aircraft, so that it will fly 'hands off' in the steady 
292 MECHANICS OF FLIGHT 
descent. In spite of these other small effects, the main effect of the power 
change is that the aircraft settles into a steady descent. As 2500 ft approaches, 
all we need to do is to pull back slightly to level out and return the throttle to 
the cruise setting (don't forget to turn off the carburettor heat) and finally 
retrim in level flight. 
Now climb back to 3000 ft. Full power first -- we don't want to lose speed. 
Pull back slightly until the speed falls to 70 knots (best rate of climb). Trim 
when things have settled. As we reach 3000 ft, push forward into level flight. 
Then, as we reach the cruising speed of 90 knots retrim when things have 
settled. Quite simple in a well-behaved aircraft like this! 
Next a stall. Throttle back to idle (carburettor heat to on). Gradually pull 
back so that no height is lost. Notice as the speed reduces that the controls 
start to have a 'soggy' feel. As the speed drops off and we continue to raise the 
nose the increased angle of attack causes the suction peak on the top of the 
wing to move towards the leading edge. Eventually we here a buzz as it trig- 
gers the stall warning device which detects the pressure near the wing leading 
edge. When we hear this, we are only a few knots above stalling speed. 
Normally we would push the yoke forward to reduce the angle of attack (yes, 
even if we are near the ground!). Now, however, we press on raising the nose, 
as we wish to experience a stall. We are now down to 45 knots, and, in spite 
of our efforts to raise the nose, it drops and we have stalled. We entered the 
stall flying straight and level, so nothing very exciting happens. To recover; 
push the yoke forward, turn carburettor heat off and select full throttle. As the 
speed builds up to the cruising speed we pull back to level out and reduce the 
throttle to the cruise setting. 
We tried a gentle turn when we were leaving the airfield circuit in a climb. 
Now we will try to do some level turns. As with most flying, the secret is to 
keep your eyes on the horizon. We check for other aircraft from right to left 
(the direction in which we are going to turn), bank gently to 10° (indicated by 
the scale outside the artificial horizon) and try to keep the line of the horizon 
constant in the windshield. Note that, as we get to the required bank angle, we 
have to remove the input to the ailerons and even reverse them slightly to hold 
the correct angle. This is because the wing on the outside of the turn has a 
slightly higher airspeed, so the centre of lift moves slightly towards this wing, 
promoting a steeper bank than was aimed for. However, the correction is made 
instinctively and careful observation is needed to see what has happened. 
A glance at the altimeter shows a slight descent, so a little backpressure to bring 
the nose up. (Note that the rate of climb indicator has a response that is too slow 
to be of use to us here). A glance at the ball in the turn and slip indicator shows a 
small degree of sideslip. Because the wing symmetry has been disturbed by the 
increase in speed of the outer wing, there is a slight tendency for the aircraft to 
yaw away from the turn due to the asymmetric vortex drag. This is countered by 
a bit of left rudder. It sounds simple but things can get a bit confusing with an 
over-correction sending the sideslip the other way. Thankfully a simple rule 
resolves the problem; if the ball is on the right, add right rudder and vice versa. 
293 
A TRIAL FLIGHT 
Now let's be a bit more adventurous and try a steep (600 bank angle) turn. 
This seems a lot more hairy as we are pulling a load factor of 2 (remember 
how the load factor goes up in a turn). The principles are the same but a lot 
more difficult to control under these circumstances. Additionally we will need 
to add some power or we will not be able to sustain speed and height. As we 
know, the power required goes up in a turn. In the shallower turn we were able 
to leave the throttle as it was and trade off a bit of speed (as we were above 
the speed for minimum power). Now we need a bit more from the engine to 
keep us going round at constant height. A check for other aircraft and round 
we go. The increased load on our bodies makes it quite difficult and, even 
when we have established a nice level turn, it is not easy to roll out on exactly 
the right heading and throttle back to re-establish straight and level flight. 
Circuit, approach and landing 
Now it's time to make our way back. We are to the north east of the airfield, 
after all our manoeuvrings, and at present flying west. Away to our left we can 
see the trunk road that passes just north of the airfield. We will steer to inter- 
cept it and cruise back to the airfield, keeping just to the right of the road (the 
rule is keep to the right when following such a feature). We will also gently 
descend to 2000 ft. 
Before we get too close to the airfield, let's plan carefully what we are going 
to do, while we have time to think and there is no other traffic to avoid. When 
294 MECHANICS OF FLIGHT 
The circuit 
Joining the circuit 
Dead side 
Downwind 
Base 
Final 
Upwind 
Crosswind 
Fig 10.1 Joining the circuit for a landing 
we get close to the airfield we will be very busy! Runway 22R is in use, so we 
will need to overfly the circuit (Fig. 10.1), before joining it for a landing. The 
circuit height is 1000 ft above the runway, so we will overfly the northern end 
of the runway, crossing above the runway numbers 500 ft higher than the 
circuit height. Remember, our altimeter is set to QNH (measuring altitude 
above sea level) so we will need to add the elevation of the airfield to give a 
reading of 1700 ft. This means we will cross the end of the runway well out of 
the way of any aircraft landing or taking off and, after this, we will turn par- 
allel to the runway, on the opposite side to the circuit (the 'dead side') and 
descend to circuit height. Then, we can re-cross the runway, at the other end 
and, if the circuit is clear, join it. Sounds complicated but this procedure will 
keep us clear of other aircraft in a relatively crowded airspace. With any luck 
Fig. 10.1 will make things a bit clearer. Now we have sorted things out in our 
minds and the airfield is just a few miles away; we give them a call to say that 
we are intending to rejoin the circuit. 
Now to put into practice all that we have just planned. First we throttle 
back slightly, get our altitude down to 1700 ft and aim to cross the runway at 
right angles at its northern end. We cross at 1700 ft and soon it is time to turn 
left so that we are flying parallel to the runway on the 'dead side' (Fig. 10.1). 
As we reach the circuit height of 1200 ft, we level off by applying slightly more 
throttle and then turn to cross the other end of the runway. Another left turn 
finally brings us into the circuit and we call 'downwind' to let everybody know 
where we are and run through the landing checklist to make sure everything 
is prepared. 
Now things start to get really busy! We are well past the end of the runway 
so we make another left turn on to 'base leg' and immediately throttle back to 
1500 rpm, put carburettor heat on (we don't want the engine to quit on us 
now!) and, at the same time, pull back on the yoke so we lose speed but keep 
altitude. As the airspeed falls, we see that we are just entering the 'white zone' 
on the airspeed indicator, which means it is now safe to lower the flaps. The 
flaps are extended by two stages on the base leg. As they extend there is a 
marked change in the trim and it becomes necessary to push forward in order 
to keep the nose down. When the flaps are extended, the speed is still reducing 
and, as it approaches 70 knots, we adjust the forward pressure on the yoke to 
keep it at this value. Now we are in a steady descent at 70 knots and we can 
trim the aircraft so that it will fly in this condition by itself. 
While this is happening we need to keep a close check on our height and 
where the airfield is. Eventually we turn towards the runway for our final 
approach and landing. As we do so we lower the final stage of flap. This time 
there is very little trim change but because of the extra drag, the speed falls to 
65 knots. We call 'final' to inform other traffic and the airfield and concentrate 
on aiming at the numbers at the beginning of the runway but keeping strictly 
to 65 knots. If our speed drops we must push forward and, if the rate of 
descent seems too high, we apply a bit more throttle. When we increase the 
throttle, note how we have to adjust to keep the nose pointing in the right 
295 
A TRIAL FLIGHT 
direction. Because of the offset thrust line, an increase in throttle setting tends 
to pitch the nose up and also roll the aircraft because of the extra torque. 
As we approach, we find a tendency to drift off to the left. Remember that 
crosswind when we took off? We must compensate by rolling slightly right and 
keeping the nose pointing down the runway by putting in a bit of opposite 
rudder to induce a slight sideslip. Now we are nicely on the approach but we 
must be alert to correct for anything which might disturb the aircraft, such as 
the wind over the group of trees, which causes us to sink too rapidly as we 
pass overhead. 
At last we arrive at the runway threshold, a few feet above the ground. 
Now we can stop worrying about the speed. We set the throttle to idle and pull 
back into the 'flare' until we are flying just above the runway. We now need to 
change where we are looking so that we can judge height and pull back as the 
speed falls off to keep flying parallel to the runway. Slightly too much pull 
back and we find ourselves a bit too high. So we freeze on the yoke (if we push 
forward we shall probably overcorrect!) until we sink to the proper height 
again. Eventually the stall warning goes off, the yoke is right back and we sink 
gracefully on to the main wheels. As the nose wheel touches, we gently apply 
brakes and, when the speed is low enough, pull off the runway to the left to 
get out of the way of any following aircraft. Next we come to a halt and clean 
the aircraft up -- flaps up, carburettor heat to cold, lights off apart from the 
anti-collision beacon, radios off apart from the communications (we will want 
to know what is happening until we have actually parked the aircraft). 
When this is done we open the throttle and taxi back to our parking space. 
Finally, we let the engine run at 1200 rpm for half a minute, so it's not too cold 
after all that idling, check that both magnetos are still working, put the 
throttle to idle and pull out the mixture to lean. This finally stops the engine 
and we turn off the master switch and remove the keys and all our belongings 
from the aircraft to finally complete our flight. 
Now we have got down in one piece, you might like to try the numerical 
questions in Appendix 3. They are all connected with our flight but you will 
need to look at the other chapters before you will be able to tackle them. 
296 MECHANICS OF FLIGHT 
Introduction 
The earlier chapters of this book have dealt with flight at speeds well below 
that at which sound travels in air -- in short, at subsonic speeds. It is true that 
frequent references have been made to the problems of high-speed flight, but 
detailed consideration of these problems has been deferred until now. 
From what has already been said, it is clear that the speed of sound has an 
important influence on the flow, and this is what we examine first. 
The speed of sound 
When a body moves through the air at speeds well below that at which sound 
travels in air, there is, as it were, a message sent ahead of the body to say that 
it is coming. When this message is received, the air streams begin to divide to 
make way for the body, and there is very little, if any, change in the density of 
the air as it flows past the body. The way in which air is thus 'warned' of the 
presence of the body which is approaching, or of changes in the shape or atti- 
tude of that body, can be clearly illustrated in a smoke tunnel in which the air 
flows over an aerofoil fitted with a flap (Fig. 11.1, overleaf). If the smoke 
streams are allowed to settle when the flap is in the closed position, and the 
flap is then lowered, all the streams of smoke many chords length in front of 
the aerofoil immediately change course, and streams which previously flowed 
below the aerofoil, now flow above it. Once again, if we could 'see the air' in 
front of an approaching aeroplane, this fact would be immediately obvious, 
and the air would begin to be disturbed perhaps 100 metres or more in front 
of the aeroplane of the approach of which it must have had some warning. 
What we have called a 'message' or 'warning' is really due to a wave- 
motion in the air set up by the areas of increased and decreased pressures 
Flight at transonic 
speeds 
CHAPTER11 
around the body. These pressures are communicated in all directions to the 
surrounding air by means of 'waves'. These waves are similar to sound waves, 
and they travel at the speed of sound, which is about 340 m/s (or 1224 km/h) 
in air at sea-level conditions. There is no mystery in this relationship between 
pressure waves and sound waves because sound is a pressure wave set up by 
some local compression of the air, and the speed of sound is simply the speed 
of propagation of rarefactions and compressions of small amplitude in the air. 
So if a body travels through the air at the speed of sound, there will be no 
time for the message as given by the wave to get ahead and the air will come 
up against the body with a 'shock'. 
Compressibility and incompressibility 
Early chapters emphasised that air is compressible; it was also emphasised, 
though perhaps not emphatically enough, that though it is compressible it 
does, in fact, behave at ordinary speeds almost as though it were incompress- 
ible. Of course such an assumption is not true, air is really compressible or, 
what is sometimes more important, expandable at all speeds and the density 
does change, i.e. increases or decreases, as the wings and bodies of aeroplanes 
move through air at quite ordinary speeds, but the point is that the error in 
making the assumption is so small as to be negligible, while the simplification 
that the assumption gives to the whole subject is by no means negligible. 
As we approach the speed of sound the error in making this assumption of 
incompressibility can no longer be justified, the air is definitely compressed, or 
expanded. We are now dealing with a compressible and expandable fluid. 
It should be clear from this that the change is gradual, not sudden; it is all 
a question of deciding when the error becomes appreciable, and a rough idea 
of the error involved may be obtained from Table 11.1, which represent the 
error in assuming the ordinary laws of aerodynamics when estimating the drag 
of a body moving through air at the speeds mentioned. 
It will be sufficiently clear from this that we must begin to change our ideas 
at speeds considerably lower than 340 m/s. 
298 MECHANICS OF FLIGHT 
Airflow 
Airflow 
Fig 11.1 Effect of lowering flap on airflow in front of aerofoil 
Approaching the speed of sound 
Consider a point A sending out pressure waves. If the point is not moving, suc- 
cessive waves 1, 2, and 3 will form circles round the point just like the waves 
which radiate from a point on the surface of water when a stone is dropped 
into the water at that point (Fig. 11.2a). Now suppose that the point A is 
moving in the direction shown, but at a speed less than the speed of propa- 
gation of the waves, and that it sends out the wave 1 when it is A1, 2 at A2, 
3 at A3; the picture will now take the form of Fig. 11.2b. Now increase the 
speed of A until it is the same as the speed of the propagation of the waves 
(Fig. 11.2c), and we soon see why the air ahead gets no warning that A is 
approaching -- we get a pretty good idea too how the waves pile up and what 
causes the 'shock'. 
Some time ago this 'shock', which occurred before the speed of sound was 
actually reached, and which in some instances had rather alarming effects on 
the flight of the aeroplane, was considered as something to be avoided at all 
costs; and the rapid increase in drag seemed a formidable enough 'barrier' at 
that time, if only because there seemed little hope of providing engine power 
to match it. 
Thus it was that the transonic range of speeds, and especially the approach 
to the speed of sound, came to acquire rather a bad reputation in the minds of 
both designers and pilots, and the difficulty in solving the problems was all the 
more frustrating because we knew, from experience of the flight of bullets and 
shells, that flight beyond the speed of sound, flight at supersonic speeds, was 
not only possible but apparently free from some of the troubles of transonic 
flight. 
To-day, of course, we know a great deal more about flight at transonic 
speeds, the 'shock' and the 'barrier' are no longer obstacles to be avoided but 
rather to be got over, or through, and the supersonic region is within the 
reach of aeroplanes as well as bullets and shells; but with all our increase of 
299 
FLIGHT AT TRANSONIC SPEEDS 
Speed 
Error in assuming incompressibility 
m/s knots km/h 
45 
87 
161 
About % 
90 175 
322 
Less than 2% 
134 260 
483 
4% 
179 347 
644 
7% 
224 436 
805 
11% 
268 522 
966 
16% 
12 
Table 11.1 Error introduced from assuming air is incompressible 
knowledge, it is interesting to note that flight at transonic speeds still pres- 
ents special problems of its own. That is why it deserves a whole chapter to 
itself. 
Shock waves 
Let us see if we can find out a little more of what actually happens during the 
change from incompressible flow to compressible flow, and so discover the 
cause of the mounting error in making the assumption of incompressibility. 
Let us also investigate the 'shock', together with its cause and effects. 
As the speed of airflow over say a streamline body increases, the first indi- 
cation that a change in the nature of the flow is taking place would seem to be 
a breakaway of the airflow from the surface of the body, usually some way 
back, setting up a turbulent wake (Fig. 11.3). This may occur at speeds less 
300 MECHANICS OF FLIGHT 
1 
2 
3 
4 
A 
(a) 
123 
A 
1 
2 
3 
4B 
(b) 
A 
1 
2 
3 
4 
B 
(c) 
12 
3 
Fig 11.2 Propagation of pressure waves 
(a) Point stationary -- sending out pressure waves 1, 2, 3, 4. 
(b) Point moving below speed of sound. 
(c) Point moving at the speed of sound. 
than half that of sound and has already been dealt with when considering the 
boundary layer. It will, of course, cause an increase of drag over and above 
that which is expected at the particular speed as reckoned on the speed- 
squared law. 
As the speed increases still further, the point of breakaway, or separation 
point tends to creep forward, resulting in thicker turbulent wake starting 
forward of the trailing edge. 
This happens because, when we reach about three-quarters of the speed of 
sound, a new phenomenon appears in the form of an incipient shock wave 
(Figs 11.4 and 11A, overleaf). This can be represented by a line approximately 
at right angles to the surface of the body and signifying a sudden rise in 
pressure and density of the air, thus holding up the airflow and causing a 
decrease of speed of flow. There is a tendency for the breakaway and turbu- 
lent wake to start from the point where the shock wave meets the surface 
which is usually at or near the point of maximum camber, i.e. where the speed 
of airflow is greatest. 
Observation of shock waves 
The understanding of shock waves is so important to the understanding of the 
problems of high-speed flight that it is worth going to a lot of trouble to learn 
as much as we can about them. 
As we remarked so often in dealing with flight at subsonic speeds, it would 
all be so much easier to understand if we could see the air. Well, fortunately 
we almost can see shock waves; they are not merely imaginary lines, lines 
drawn on diagrams just to illustrate something which isn't actually there, they 
301 
FLIGHT AT TRANSONIC SPEEDS 
Subsonic 
flowM=0.6 
Fig 11.3 Breakaway of airflow 
Shock 
wave 
Sudden increase of 
pressure and density 
and fall in velocity 
Airflow increasing 
to speed of sound 
Airflow below 
speed of sound 
Airflow below 
speed of sound 
Fig 11.4 Incipient shock wave 
are physical phenomena which can be photographed in the laboratory by suit- 
able optical means, and in certain conditions they may even be visible to the 
naked eye. 
The photographic methods depend on the fact that rays of light are bent if 
there are changes of density in their path. In the 'direct shadow' method the 
shock wave appears on a ground-glass screen, or on a photographic plate, as 
a dark band with a lighter band on the high-pressure side. But the system that 
has proved most effective is known as the 'schlieren' method, and the results 
obtained by it are so illuminating, and have contributed so much to our under- 
standing of the subject, that the method itself deserves a brief description. The 
word 'schlieren', by the way, is not the name of some German or Austrian sci- 
entist, but simply the German word for streaking or striation, which is 
descriptive of the method; nor is the method itself modern, it was used a 
hundred years ago for finding streaks and other flaws in mirrors and lenses, 
just as it now finds 'flaws' or changes of density in the air. 
The fundamental principle behind the schlieren method is that light travels 
more slowly through denser air; so if the density of air is changing across, or 
at right angles to, the direction in which light rays are travelling, the rays will 
be bent or deflected towards the higher density (Fig. 11.5). Notice that the 
bending only takes place when the density of the air is changing (across the 
path of the rays) -- there is no bending when the rays pass through air density 
302 MECHANICS OF FLIGHT 
Fig 11A Incipient shock wave 
(By courtesy of the Shell Petroleum Co Ltd) 
An incipient shock wave (taken by schlieren photography) has formed on 
the upper surface; the light areas near the leading edge are expansion 
regions, separated by the stagnation area which appears as a dark blob at 
the nose. 
which is constant across their path, nor if the density changes along their path; 
in those cases the rays are merely slowed up by high density. 
Figure 11.6 (overleaf) shows a typical arrangement of mirrors and lenses as 
used in the schlieren method. From a light source A the rays pass through a 
lens B, to a concave mirror C, which reflects parallel rays through the glass 
walls of a wind tunnel to another concave mirror D, which in turn reflects the 
rays on to a knife edge at E, where an image of the light source is formed. Rays 
that pass through changing density near the model in the tunnel are bent, those 
passing through falling density being deflected one way, and those passing 
through rising density the other way. At E either more or less light will be let 
through depending on whether the ray has been deflected onto or away from 
the knife edge by the density changes. Thus the image of the working section 
at F will show light or dark areas (Fig. 11A). In a film on High-speed Flight 
produced by the Shell Petroleum Company, to whom I am indebted for these 
schlieren pictures, a colour filter was used at E and in this ingenious way 
increasing density was shown on the screen in one colour, decreasing density 
in another, and unchanging density in yet another; thus giving a real live 
picture of changes of density as the air flowed over different shapes at different 
speeds. 
It is interesting to note that whereas the schlieren method reveals the change 
of density in a certain distance, the direct shadow method shows changing 
rates of density change, and other methods, such as the Mach Zender and laser 
interferometers, the actual density in different places. So each method has its 
advantages, but each needs rather different interpretation if we are to realise 
exactly what it is showing us. 
Figure 11A is a photograph of a shock wave obtained by the schlieren 
method, and the fact that it appears as a narrow strip at right angles to the top 
surface of the aerofoil shows that across the strip there is a sudden increase in 
303 
FLIGHT AT TRANSONIC SPEEDS 
High density. No bending of rays 
Low density. No bending of rays 
Rays 
towards 
higher 
density 
Light 
rays 
bending 
Density
increasing
Fig 11.5 Bending of light rays through changing density 
density. Immediately behind and immediately in front of the strip the density 
is reasonably constant, though greater of course behind than in front. Colour 
photography reveals another small area of increasing density immediately in 
front of the nose of the aerofoil as we might expect, and a large area above the 
nose and a smaller area below in which the density is decreasing. 
Schlieren pictures of airflow at speeds well below that of sound show no 
appreciable changes of density at all, so now we see the fundamental change 
that takes place as we approach the speed of sound; the air begins to reveal its 
true nature as a very compressible -- and expandable -- fluid. 
Effects of shock waves -- the shock stall 
It is clear from schlieren photographs that there is a sudden and considerable 
increase in density of air at the shock wave, but there is also, as has been 
stated, a rise in pressure (and incidentally of temperature), and a decrease in 
speed. Most important of all perhaps is the breakaway of the flow from the 
surface, though it is sometimes argued whether this causes the shock wave or 
the shock wave causes it. Whichever way it is the result is the same. 
As is rather to be expected all this adds up to a sudden and considerable 
increase in drag -- it may be as much as a ten times increase. This is accompa- 
nied, if it is an aerofoil, by a loss of lift and often, due to a completely changed 
pressure distribution, to a change in position of the centre of pressure and 
pitching moment, which in turn may upset the balance of the aeroplane. At the 
same time the turbulent airflow behind the shock wave is apt to cause severe 
buffeting, especially if this flow strikes some other part of the aeroplane such 
as the tail plane. One can hardly avoid saying -- very like a stall. Yes, so like 
the stall that it is called just that -- a shock stall. 
304 MECHANICS OF FLIGHT 
Light 
source 
Slit 
Lens 
Airflow 
through tunnel 
Rays bent 
Model 
Glass 
tunnel walls 
Camera 
Knife edge 
Image of slit 
A 
B 
E 
F 
Concave 
mirror 
C 
D 
Concave mirror 
Fig 11.6 Arrangement for schlieren photography 
View from above. 
But the similarity must not lead us to forget the essential difference -- no it 
isn't the speed, we have already made it clear, or tried very hard to make it 
clear, that the ordinary stall can occur at any speed; the essential difference is 
that the 'ordinary stall' occurs at a large angle of attack and, to avoid confu- 
sion, we shall in future call it the high-incidence stall to distinguish it from the 
shock stall which is more likely to occur at small angles of attack. 
From what has already been said the reader will probably have realised that 
the formation of shock waves is not a phenomenon that occurs on the wings 
alone; it may apply to any part of the aeroplane. Even the shock stall, which 
may first become noticeable owing to the sudden increase of drag and onset of 
buffeting -- it is sometimes called the buffet boundary -- may be caused by the 
formation of shock waves on such parts as the body or engine intakes, rather 
than on the wings (Fig. 11B, overleaf). 
Shock drag 
The sudden extra drag which is such a marked feature of the shock stall has 
two main components. First the energy dissipated in the shock wave itself is 
reflected in additional drag (wave drag) on the aerofoil. Secondly, as we have 
seen, the shock wave may be accompanied by separation, or at any rate a 
thickening of and increase in turbulence level in the boundary layer. Either of 
these will modify both the pressure on the surface and the skin friction behind 
the shock wave. 
So this shock drag may be considered as being made up of two parts, i.e. 
the wave-making resistance, or wave drag, and the drag caused by the thick 
turbulent boundary layer or region of separation which we will call boundary 
layer drag. 
As has already been explained the shock wave and the thickened turbulent 
boundary layer or separation are like the chicken and the egg -- we don't know 
which comes first; what we do know is that when one comes so does the other. 
That is not to say that they are by any means the same thing, or that they have 
the same effects, or that a device which reduces one will necessarily reduce the 
other. 
Mach Number 
The time has come to introduce a term that is now on everybody's lips in con- 
nection with high-speed flight -- Mach Number. This term is a compliment to 
the Austrian Professor Ernst Mach (1838--1916), who was professor of the 
history and theory of science in the University of Vienna, and who was 
observing and studying shock waves as long ago as 1876. Incidentally, his 
305 
FLIGHT AT TRANSONIC SPEEDS 
306 MECHANICS OF FLIGHT 
Fig 11B Shock waves 
(By courtesy of the former British Aircraft Corporation, Preston) 
Top: Lightning at M 0.98; low pressure regions above canopy and wing 
cause condensation, the rear limit of the condensation marks the shock 
wave. 
Bottom: Schlieren photograph of model of Lightning at M 0.98; note the 
extraordinarily close resemblance to actual flight. 
Science of Mechanics, which was published in English in 1893, throws much 
light on the work of Newton and others, and is well worth reading. 
Fortunately the definition of Mach Number is simple. The Mach Number (M) 
refers to the speed at which an aircraft is travelling in relation to the speed of sound. 
Thus a Mach Number of 0.5 means that the aircraft is travelling at half the speed 
of sound. Both the speed of the aircraft and the speed of sound are true speeds. 
Variation of speed of sound 
There is one small complication that must be introduced into the definition of 
Mach Number even at this stage. The speed of sound varies according to the 
temperature of the air, and therefore we must add to the definition the fact that 
the speed of sound must be that corresponding to the temperature of the air in 
which the aircraft is actually travelling. People are often surprised to hear that 
the speed of sound in air depends on temperature alone. 
The actual relationship is that the speed of sound is proportional to the 
square root of the absolute temperature. 
We have seen that temperature falls with height in the atmosphere, and in 
the stratosphere where the temperature is about  60°C (213 K) the speed of 
sound will have fallen from about 340 m/s at sea-level to about 295 m/s. 
Perhaps it should be emphasised again that this drop in the speed of sound 
is not really a function of the height at all; at a temperature of  60°C such as 
may occur at sea-level in, say, the North of Canada in winter, the speed of 
sound would also be about 290 m/s, while in tropical climates it might be well 
over 340 m/s even at considerable heights. 
This variation of the speed of sound with temperature accounted for the 
rather surprising feature of speed record attempts of some years back in that the 
pilots waited for hot weather, or went to places where they expected hot weather, 
in order to make the attempts. Surprising because it had always been considered, 
and was in fact true, that high temperatures act against the performance of both 
aircraft and engine. The point, of course, is that the record breakers wanted to 
go as fast as possible while keeping as far away as possible from the speed of 
sound -- so they wanted the speed of sound to be as high as possible. Nowadays 
in breaking speed records the aim of the pilot is just the opposite, i.e. to get 
through the speed of sound as quickly as possible -- but we are anticipating. 
Critical Mach Number 
It has already been made clear that the onset of compressibility is a gradual 
effect, and that things begin to happen at speeds considerably lower than the 
speed of sound, that is at Mach Numbers of less than 1. One reason for this is 
307 
FLIGHT AT TRANSONIC SPEEDS 
that, as explained in earlier chapters, there is an increase in the speed of airflow 
over certain parts of the aeroplane as, for instance, over the point of greatest 
camber of an aerofoil. This means that although the aeroplane itself may be trav- 
elling at well below the speed of sound, the airflow relative to some parts of the 
aeroplane may attain that value. In short, there may be a local increase in vel- 
ocity up to beyond that of sound and a shock wave may form at this point. This 
in turn, may result in an increase of drag, decrease of lift, movement of centre of 
pressure, and buffeting. In an aeroplane in flight the results may be such as to 
cause the aircraft to become uncontrollable, in much the same way as it becomes 
uncontrollable at the high incidence stall at the other end of the speed range. 
All this will occur at a certain Mach Number (less than 1), which will be 
different for different types of aircraft, and which is called the critical Mach 
Number (Mcr) of the type. 
The reader who has followed the argument so far will not be surprised to 
learn that the general characteristic of a type of aircraft that has a high critical 
Mach Number is slimness, because over such an aircraft the local increases of 
velocity will not be very great. This was well illustrated by the Spitfire, a 'slim' 
aircraft that was originally designed without much thought as to its perform- 
ance near the speed of sound, yet which has proved to have a critical Mach 
Number of nearly 0.9, one of the highest ever achieved. 
We had some difficulty in deciding whether the ordinary stalling speed should 
be defined as the speed at which the lift coefficient is a maximum, or at which 
the airflow burbles over the wing, or at which the pilot loses control over the air- 
craft. They are all related, but they do not necessarily all occur at the same speed. 
So now with the critical Mach Number -- is it the Mach Number at which the 
local airflow at some point reaches the velocity of sound? or at which a shock 
wave is formed? or at which the air burbles? or when severe buffeting begins (this 
is sometimes called the 'buffet boundary' of the aircraft)? or at which the drag 
coefficient begins to rise? -- or, again, when the pilot loses control? I do not know 
-- nor, apparently, does anyone else! Authorities differ on the matter, each looking 
at it according to their own point of view, or sometimes according to whether 
they want to claim a high critical Mach Number for a pet type of aircraft. 
However, it doesn't matter very much; they are really all part of the same 
phenomenon. 
Is it possible for an aircraft to fly at a Mach Number higher than its critical 
Mach Number? Is it possible for an aircraft to have a critical Mach Number 
higher than 1? These two questions may at first sound silly, but they are not. 
The answers to both depend entirely on which of the many definitions of 
critical Mach Number we adopt. If the critical Mach Number is when the pilot 
loses control, then he can hardly fly beyond it; but if it is when a shock wave 
is formed, or when the drag coefficient begins to rise, why not? The pilot may 
not even know that it has happened, any more than he knows whether he is 
at the maximum lift coefficient in an ordinary stall. Graphs of lift and drag 
coefficients are all very well, but one cannot see them on the instrument panel 
when flying. Supposing the pilot can maintain control through all the shock 
308 MECHANICS OF FLIGHT 
waves, increases of drag coefficient and so on, then the critical Mach Number 
is higher than 1 or, to be more correct, the aircraft has not got a critical Mach 
Number in any of the senses that we have so far defined it, except for the one 
relating to the first appearance of supersonic flow locally or the first appear- 
ance of shock waves. 
Drag rise in the transonic region 
The behaviour of the drag coefficient, for a thin aerofoil shape at constant 
angle of attack, can best be illustrated by a diagram (Fig. 11.7). This shows 
that up to a Mach Number of about 0.7 the drag coefficient remains constant 
-- which means that our elementary principles are true -- then it begins to rise. 
According to one definition the Mach Number at which it begins to rise, in this 
example 0.7, is the critical Mach Number. At M of 0.8 and 0.85 CD is rising 
rapidly. Note that the curve then becomes dotted and the full line is resumed 
again at an M of about 1.2. The reason for this is interesting. For a long time, 
although it was possible to operate high-speed wind tunnels up to an M of 
about 0.85, and again at M of 1.2 or more, in the region of the speed of sound 
a shock wave developed right across the wind tunnel itself, the tunnel became 
'choked' and the speed could not be maintained. Thus there were no reliable 
wind tunnel results in this region, and the dotted part of the curve was really 
an intelligent guess. This difficulty has now been overcome, and experiments 
have also been made by other means, by dropping bodies, or propelling them 
309 
FLIGHT AT TRANSONIC SPEEDS 
Subsonic 
region 
Transonic 
region 
Supersonic region 
Mach Number 
Drag coefficient
THE BARRIER
One definition of
critical Mach number
0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0 1.2 1.4 1.6 1.8 2.0 2.2 
X 
Fig 11.7 Transonic drag rise 
with rockets and also, of course, by full-scale flight tests, and the guess can 
now be confirmed. Previous experiments on shells had of course suggested that 
there was nothing much wrong with it. The curve is still left dotted, partly to 
remind us of this bit of aeronautical history, but more now to emphasise the 
strange behaviour of the drag coefficient in the transonic region. 
After a Mach Number of about 1.2, CD drops and eventually, at M of 2 or 
more becomes nearly constant again though at a higher value than the orig- 
inal, variously quoted as 2 or 3 times. 
The diagram shows that there is a definite hurdle to be got over. But it also 
shows that conditions on the other side are again reasonable and that super- 
sonic flight, as we now of course know only too well, is a practical 
proposition. 
The reader is advised to work through Question 253 (Appendix 3) in which 
he will plot the actual drag, as distinct from the coefficient, and it will then be 
clear that the drag also actually falls after M 1, but that the reduction is not 
quite so evident in terms of drag as in terms of drag coefficient. 
Subsonic -- transonic -- supersonic 
We have already talked about flight at subsonic, transonic, and supersonic 
speeds, and it should now be clear that the problems of flight are quite dif- 
ferent in these three regions, but the dividing lines between the regions are of 
necessity somewhat vague. Figure 11.7 shows the subsonic region as being 
below a Mach Number of 0.8, the transonic region from M 0.8 to M 1.2, and 
the supersonic region above M 1.2. There are arguments in favour of consid- 
ering the transonic region as starting earlier, say at a Mach Number of about 
0.7 or near the point marked in the figure as the critical Mach Number, and 
extending up to say a Mach Number of 1.6 or even 2.0. In terms of sea-level 
speeds this would mean defining subsonic speeds as being below 450 knots, 
transonic speeds as 450 up to 1000 or even 1200 knots, and supersonic speeds 
above that. 
Perhaps the best definition of the three regions is to say that the subsonic 
region is that in which all the airflow over all parts of the aeroplane is subsonic, 
the transonic region is that in which some of the airflow is subsonic and some 
supersonic, and the supersonic region is that in which all the airflow is super- 
sonic. Once again we are in trouble if we take our definition too literally. Even 
at very high speeds we may have local pockets of subsonic flow -- just in front 
of a blunt nose for example. So the Space Shuttle would only be transonic even 
at the fastest point of re-entry! Also with this definition we are none the wiser 
as to the speeds or Mach Numbers at which each regions begins or ends; the 
beginnings and endings will of course be quite different for different aeroplanes. 
In this chapter our main concern is with speeds in the transonic range, and 
particularly in the narrow range between Mach Numbers of 0.8 and 1.2. This 
310 MECHANICS OF FLIGHT 
range, as is probably already evident, presents us with some of the most baf- 
fling but fascinating problems of flight; it is the range in which most of the 
change takes place, the change from apparent incompressibility to actual com- 
pressibility, the gradual substitution of supersonic flow for subsonic flow; it is 
the range about which we are even now most ignorant. 
Flight at transonic speeds -- drag and power required 
There was a time when the prospects of supersonic flight seemed poor owing 
to the lack of engines with the necessary power to overcome the rapid rise in 
drag which begins at the critical Mach Number. Even without compressibility 
effects the drag would rise with the square of the velocity, and the power -- 
which is Drag Velocity -- with the cube of the velocity. The effect of com- 
pressibility is to increase these values still further in accordance with Table 
11.2, which shows the approximate figures for a Spitfire. 
311 
FLIGHT AT TRANSONIC SPEEDS 
Velocity (knots) 
250 350 450 550 650 
Velocity (m/s) 
129 180 232 283 335 
Velocity (km/h) 
464 649 834 1019 1205 
Power (kW) without compressibility 750 1900 2430 6000 9700 
Actual power required (kW) 
750 1900 2510 7500 22 000 
Velocity (m/s) 
130 180 230 280 335 
Power (kW) to be given to propeller 820 2390 6000 15 000 100 000? 
Actually the problem was much more serious than this, if we assumed that 
the aircraft would be driven by propellers. As was explained in Chapter 4, 
the efficiency of a good propeller is about 80 per cent at its best, but its 'best' 
is at speeds of 129 to 180 m/s, after which the efficiency falls off very rapidly 
(although a new generation of propellers has pushed this up) -- this happens 
for various reasons, but chiefly because the propeller tips are the first part of 
the aircraft to suffer from compressibility. With the high forward speed of 
the aeroplane combined with the rotary speed of the circumference of the 
propeller disc, Mach Number troubles begin to occur at aircraft speeds of 
about 180 m/s, and the result is so disastrous that the power which would 
have to be supplied to the propeller by the engine in order to attain the 
speeds given in Table 11.2 would look something more like Table 11.3 a con- 
ventional propeller. 
Table 11.2 Power required with compressibility 
Table 11.3 Power required accounting for propellor efficiency 
When one looks at these figures one realises why it was that people who 
knew what they were talking about forecast not so many years ago that it 
would be a long, long time before we could exceed 300 m/s. 
Yet they were wrong. And for one simple reason -- the advent of the gas 
turbine and the first flight of a jet-driven aircraft in 1941. This made all the 
difference, partly because of the elimination of the propeller and its compress- 
ibility problems (it is true that there are similar problems with the turbine 
blades in the jet engine), but mainly because, the efficiency of the jet increases 
rapidly over just those speeds, 154 to 257 m/s, when the efficiency of the 
propeller is falling rapidly. The net result is that whereas the reciprocating- 
engine-propeller combination requires nearly twenty times as much power to 
fly at 500 compared with 250 knots, the jet engine only requires about five 
times the thrust, and it is thrust that matters in a jet engine. Further, the weight 
of the jet engine is only a small fraction of that of the reciprocating-engine- 
propeller combination, and at this speed even the fuel consumption is less. 
Maybe the prophets ought to have foreseen the jet engine -- but they didn't, 
at least not within anything like the time during which it actually appeared. 
Of course, there were good reasons too why they didn't foresee it, for no 
metal could then possibly stand up to the temperatures of the gas turbine 
blades. 
The jet engine, then, was the first step in solving the problem of high-speed 
flight. And while on the subject of engines, the rocket system of propulsion 
takes us even a step further and no one now, who knows the subject dares 
predict the limits of speed that may be reached with rockets -- outside the 
atmosphere there really isn't any limit. 
As hinted above, it is interesting to note that lately the wheel looks like 
turning a full circle. Improvement in propeller design means that the tip prob- 
lems can be largely overcome and a gas turbine/propeller combination 
promises better efficiency in the future than a turbojet at transonic speeds. 
Flight at transonic speeds -- the pilot's point of view 
We have so far discussed the problems of approaching the speed of sound very 
much from the point of view of the designer -- but what about the pilot? Well, 
to find out what is going on, or what is likely to happen, the first thing needed 
is an instrument to measure at what Mach Number an aircraft is flying. 
Various types of machmeter are already in existence, and no doubt they will 
be improved in accuracy and reliability. For a machmeter to give a reliable 
indication of the Mach Number it must measure, in effect, the true speed of 
the aircraft and the true speed of sound for the actual temperature of the air. 
The first is usually done via the indicated speed, which can be corrected for air 
density by a compensating device within the instrument, but which still 
includes position error. A temperature compensating device can be used to give 
312 MECHANICS OF FLIGHT 
the true speed of sound, but in modern instruments this has been eliminated, 
and a combination of aneroid barometer and air speed indicator gives all the 
correction required -- except that of position error. The term 'Indicated Mach 
Number' is sometimes used for the reading of the machmeter, but it is an 
unsatisfactory term since it differs from indicated air speed in that the main 
correction, that of density, has already been made in the instrument itself. 
In the absence of a machmeter the pilot will find that the air speed indicator 
is apt to give very misleading ideas -- even more so than usual. This assumes, 
of course, that the pilot is not one of those who have already discovered that 
what the air speed indicator reads is not an air speed at all! Without such 
knowledge, a pilot may reason that if the speed of sound is around 340 m/s it 
is impossible to run into trouble with say 103 m/s on the clock; a shock stall 
at this speed might come as a real shock. 
Yet such a shock is possible because -- 
In the first place, the speed of sound is a real speed, a true speed. 
Secondly, it decreases with fall of temperature, down to 295 m/s, or less, in 
the stratosphere. 
Thirdly, the speed as indicated is not the true speed, and the error is more 
than 100 per cent in the stratosphere, so that at a real speed of 340 m/s at say 
40 000 ft, the indicator will read less than 154 m/s. 
Fourthly, trouble begins not at the speed of sound but at the critical Mach 
Number, and if this is 0.7 (a low value but by no means unknown), a shock 
stall may occur at 0.7 154, i.e. 108 m/s on the clock. 
Fifthly -- and a point not so far mentioned -- a shock stall occurs at an even 
lower critical Mach Number during manoeuvres, so that in a turn the 108 
might be reduced to less than 103. 
And there we are! 
The figures are all possible, they might even be worse. 
There is one compensation; the pitot head is one of the first parts to experience 
the effects of compressibility, which may cause the air speed indicator to over-read 
at very high speeds -- but this is usually allowed for in calibration. 
313 
FLIGHT AT TRANSONIC SPEEDS 
Height 
True speed True speed at which Reading of ASI 
of sound shock stall will occur 
at this speed 
assuming Mcr 0.7 
feet 
metres knots m/s 
knots 
m/s 
0 
0 661 340 
463 
463 238 
10 000 3048 640 329 
448 
385 198 
20 000 6096 614 316 
430 
315 162 
30 000 9144 589 303 
412 
253 130 
40 000 12 192 573 295 
401 
200 103 
50 000 15 240 573 295 
401 
156 
80 
Table 11.4 Air speed indicator readings and truespeed 
Table 11.4 may be a help to a pilot in realising what is going on; the figures 
are calculated on the assumption of the International Standard Atmosphere 
and will vary to some extent according to how much actual conditions differ 
from this. 
The figures in the last column are the readings of the air speed indicator at 
which a shock stall may occur (it may even occur at lower indicated speeds 
because the figures given do not allow for manoeuvres), and they are apt to be 
rather alarming. There is, however, another way of looking at it -- and one that 
is much more heartening. 
Suppose one dives from 50 000 ft at a constant true speed of, say, 450 
knots; that is at a rapidly increasing speed on the clock of -- 
176 knots at 50 000 ft, 
225 knots at 40 000 ft, 
275 knots at 30 000 ft, 
328 knots at 20 000 ft, 
387 knots at 10 000 ft, 
and 450 knots at sea-level, 
strange as it may seem, the actual Mach Numbers would be decreasing as 
follows -- 
450/570 or 0.77 at 50 000 ft, 
450/570 or 0.77 at 40 000 ft, 
450/590 or 0.76 at 30 000 ft, 
450/616 or 0.73 at 20 000 ft, 
450/640 or 0.70 at 10 000 ft, 
450/666 or 0.68 at sea-level. 
This means that if the critical Mach Number were 0.7 an aircraft that was shocked 
stalled at 50 000 ft would become unstalled at a height of about 10 000 ft. 
Even if the true speed were to increase during the dive, as would probably 
happen in practice, there might still be a drop in Mach Number. 
This consoling feature of the problem is based on the assumption of rise in 
temperature with loss of height -- if the temperature does not rise, that is to 
314 MECHANICS OF FLIGHT 
say, if there is an inversion, well the reader -- and the pilot -- can calculate what 
will happen! 
Behaviour of aeroplane at shock stall 
All this rather assumes that there is something to be feared about a shock stall, 
and that pilots try to avoid it. After all, there was a time when we looked upon 
the high incidence stall in the same way -- something to be avoided at all costs. 
Now, however, it is practised by all pilots in the very early stages of learning. 
Much the same is happening to the shock stall -- it is all a question of knowl- 
edge, and many aircraft currently cruise safely well into the transonic region. 
By far the most important effect is a considerable change of longitudinal 
trim -- usually, but not always, towards nose-down, and sometimes first one 
way then the other. Unfortunately the change of trim is made even worse by 
the very large forces required to move the controls, and the ineffectiveness of 
the trimmers. There is also likely to be buffeting, vibration of the ailerons, and 
pitching and yawing oscillations which may become uncontrollable, and 
which are variously described as snaking (yawing from side to side), por- 
poising (pitching up and down), and the Dutch roll (a combination of roll and 
yaw). 
These effects can, though, be alleviated by the use of power controls and 
automatic stability augmentation systems. The best way of avoiding the diffi- 
culties is to keep an eye on the machmeter -- if there is one -- and, if the worst 
comes to the worst, to get into regions of higher temperature. The best ways 
of getting out of trouble are to stop going so fast -- or to go faster! In a climb 
it is easy to stop going so fast -- just throttle back. That is why the safest and 
best research work can often be done in climbing flight. In level flight it may 
not be quite so easy to lose speed, especially if the controls cannot be moved; 
and in a dive, which is where these troubles are most likely to occur, it will be 
even more difficult. It is essential therefore that all aircraft which are capable 
of these speeds, and which have undesirable characteristics in the transonic 
range, should have some kind of dive brake, or spoiler, which can safely be 
used at high Mach Numbers. We have had to go very fast on aeroplanes before 
the need for a brake was recognised! As to going faster; well, that will take us 
into the region of supersonic flight which will be dealt with in the next chapter. 
Height and speed range 
It was explained in Chapter 7 that for a piston-engined aircraft owing to limi- 
tations of power the speed range of an aircraft narrows with height, until, at 
the absolute ceiling, there is only one possible speed of flight. This speed, 
315 
FLIGHT AT TRANSONIC SPEEDS 
however, was not the stalling speed, but rather the speed of best endurance, 
and the absolute ceiling was simply a question of engine power; for a given air- 
craft, the greater the power supplied, the higher would be the ceiling. 
Now, however, with almost unlimited thrust available in the form of jets or 
rockets, or eventually perhaps atomic energy, there is an altogether new aspect 
of the limitation of height at which an aircraft can fly without stalling -- one 
way or the other. For the true speed of the high incidence stall will increase 
with height, while the true speed of the shock stall will fall from sea-level to 
the base of the stratosphere, and then remain constant. The result, assuming a 
sea-level stalling speed (high incidence) of 46 m/s and a critical Mach Number 
of 0.8, is shown in Fig. 11.8, the shaded portions being the regions in which 
flight is not possible without stalling. It will be evident that if this aeroplane is 
to avoid both kinds of stall, it cannot fly above 23 000 m, whatever the power 
available, while if it flies at 23 000 m, it can only fly at the stalling speed. If it 
flies any slower it will stall (high incidence), and if it flies any faster it will stall 
(shock). Surely a modern interpretation of being between the devil and the 
deep sea! Figure 11.9 shows exactly the same thing from the point of view of 
indicated speeds. Thus, quite apart from engine power, there is a limitation to 
the height of subsonic flight, and a narrowing of the speed range as the lim- 
iting height is approached. 
This curious coming together of the two stalls will occur at considerably 
lower heights during manoeuvres, which will cause the high incidence stalling 
speed to increase, and the shock stalling speed to decrease. The figures in Table 
11.5 are quite reasonable for 40 000 ft (say 12 000 m). 
316 MECHANICS OF FLIGHT 
High incidence stall (true air speeds) 
Shock stall (true air speeds) 
90 180 360 380 
380 400 570 661 
knots ? 
??? 
? ??? 
knots 
Increase of high incidence stalling speed Decrease of shock stalling speed 
Normal stall, sea-level
Normal stall at 40 000 ft
Stall at 4g, at 40 000 ft
Further increased at high M
to, say,
At 4g, this may be reduced
to, say
M 0.7 40000ft
M 1
40 000 ft
M 1
Sea-level
Table 11.5 Effect of altitude on stalling speeds 
One must always be careful in interpreting results of this kind. The above 
discussion must not be taken to imply that all aircraft are limited by shock stall 
or buffet at the maximum speed. This will be true for aircraft designed for eco- 
nomical cruise at transonic speed (as are most commercial airliners) but clearly 
many aircraft are designed to pass through the transonic speed range and 
cruise at supersonic speed -- but more of that in the next chapter. 
317 
FLIGHT AT TRANSONIC SPEEDS 
True air speed, metres per second 
True air speed, knots 
Sea-level 
Sea-level 
Height, thousands of feet
Height, thousands of metres
100 
80 
60 
40 
20 
0 
50 
100 150 200 250 300 350 
100 200 300 400 500 600 700 
30 
25 
20 
15 
10 
5 
Stratosphere
Troposphere
Tropopause 
Possible speed range 
of flight between high 
incidence stall and shock stall 
0 
High incidence stalling speed -- assuming 
90 knots at sea-level 
True speed of sound -- 
i.e. Mach No. 1.0
Shock stalling speed -- 
assuming critical Mach No. 0.8
Fig 11.8 Subsonic speed range of flight -- true speeds 
Indicated air speed, metres per second 
Indicated air speed, knots 
Sea-level 
Sea-level 
Troposphere Stratosphere
Tropopause 
Height, thousands of feet
Height, thousands of metres
100 
80 
60 
40 
20 
0 
50 
100 150 200 250 300 350 
100 200 300 400 500 600 700 
0 
30 
25 
20 
15 
10 
5 
Constant indicated high
incidence stalling speed
Indicated shock stalling speed 
critical Mach No. 0.8 
Possible speed 
range of flight between 
high incidence stall and shock stall 
Indicated speed of sound Mach Number 1.0 
Fig 11.9 Subsonic speed range of flight -- indicated speeds 
Before we move on to supersonic flow, though, we will spend a little time 
examining the ways in which knowledge of transonic flows was acquired by 
experiment and how this knowledge is used in the design of aircraft which 
operate at transonic speeds. 
Experimental methods 
In the course of this book there has been frequent comment to the effect that 
theory has tended to lag behind practice as the means whereby we have 
acquired aeronautical knowledge. Some critics have said that this claim has 
been exaggerated, but the author still believes that it is fair comment. It cer- 
tainly isn't a new idea for this is an extract from the 14th Annual Report of 
the Aeronautical Society of Great Britain (now the Royal Aeronautical 
Society) -- 'Mathematics up to the present day has been quite useless to us in 
regard to flying' -- the date of that report, 1879! 
But whatever may have been the relative importance of theory and experi- 
ment in the acquisition of knowledge about subsonic flight, even the most 
theoretically-minded critic will surely agree that we have had to rely almost 
entirely on experiment in solving the problems of transonic flight, for here we 
have a mixture of subsonic and supersonic flow, compressibility and incom- 
pressibility, two completely different theories all mixed up. Curiously enough, 
in real supersonic flight, theory comes into its own; supersonic theory is 
simpler and older than that of subsonics or transonics -- Newton's theories 
used to calculate air resistance of a body at 515 m/s give an answer nearer the 
truth than if they are used to calculate its resistance at 51.5 m/s. 
But one of the fascinations of this subject is that the experimental methods 
themselves are so interesting, involving as they do their own theories quite 
apart from the facts that they reveal. So far as transonic and supersonic flight 
are concerned we have already referred to ingenious methods of photography 
which give us pictures not only of shock waves, but also of smaller changes of 
density; and by taking films by these methods we can watch the changes of 
density and of the shock pattern as speed is increased from subsonic to tran- 
sonic, then through the transonic to the supersonic region. At subsonic speeds 
we have devised methods of seeing the flow of air, but the schlieren and other 
methods show something even more important -- what happens as a result of 
airflow. We have learnt a very great deal by these methods, and we shall look 
at some more pictures later. 
But though it is conceivable that by very elaborate means such photographs 
could be taken in flight they really require laboratory conditions, which means 
wind tunnels. Now wind tunnels present quite enough problems at subsonic 
speeds; but as we approach the speed of sound the very shock waves which we 
want to investigate and photograph, obstruct the flow through the tunnel 
(even when it hasn't got a model in it), and raise a barrier so effective that the 
318 MECHANICS OF FLIGHT 
tunnel is virtually choked and the high-speed flow cannot get through. Even if 
the tunnel design can be modified so as to allow the flow, the shock waves on 
even the smallest of models will cause very severe interference between the 
model and the walls of the tunnel, and so make the results of the tests value- 
less. This choking of wind tunnels, which was particularly difficult to 
overcome between Mach Numbers of 0.85 and 1.1, is the explanation of two 
rather curious facts in aeronautical history, that a truly supersonic wind tunnel 
became a practical proposition before a transonic one, and that flight at super- 
sonic speeds took place before such speeds were reached in wind tunnels. 
The problem of the transonic wind tunnel has now been largely overcome 
(though rather late in the day) by using slotted or perforated walls, and there 
are many types of supersonic tunnel in use today. Some of these are very 
similar to subsonic types in general outline; the extra speed has simply been 
obtained by more power together with suitable profiling of the duct -- perhaps 
simply is not quite the right word, because the increase in power required, and 
consequent cost, is tremendous. It might be thought that fans of the propeller 
type would not be suitable for such tunnels; but in fact they can be used 
because they are situated at a portion of the tunnel where the speed is com- 
paratively low, the cross-section of the tunnel, and therefore the propeller, 
being correspondingly large. The great size of the propeller, often larger than 
any used on aircraft, presents problems of its own, but none the less this con- 
ventional type of tunnel, which may be straight through, return flow or even 
open jet, is probably the most satisfactory where a large tunnel is required. 
For smaller types, and higher speeds, it is more usual to employ some kind 
of reservoir of compressed air and, by opening a valve, to allow this to blow 
through the tunnel to the atmospheric pressure at the exhaust (Fig. 11.10). By 
arranging for the exhaust to be into a vacuum tank, even higher speeds can be 
obtained. One great disadvantage of this method is that continuous running 
for long periods is impossible; in fact constant speed is only achieved for a very 
319 
FLIGHT AT TRANSONIC SPEEDS 
Control 
valve 
Throat 
Second 
throat 
Settling 
chamber 
Working 
section 
Diffuser 
Compressed 
air 
reservoir 
Model 
M=1 
M 
less than 
1 
Contraction 
Weak 
shock 
M greater 
than 1 
May be heated 
for mach numbers 
greater than 3 or 4 
Exhaust to vacuum 
tank for mach numbers 
greater than 3 or 4 
Fig 11.10 High-speed wind tunnel: blow-through type 
short time. It sounds rather primitive, and in some ways it is, but Mach 
Numbers of 4 or more may be reached by this method, though the cross-sec- 
tional area of the working section is usually small. 
More efficient, at some Mach Numbers, than this straight blow-down type 
of tunnel is the induction or induced flow type, in which air is blown in or 
injected just down stream of the working section (Fig. 11.11), thus 'inducing' 
a flow of air from the atmosphere through the mouth of the tunnel. Notice 
that in this type the compressed air does not flow over the model at all, only 
the induced air does. The injected flow can be the jet of a turbo-jet engine; in 
fact the jet engine itself can be in the tunnel. An induction type tunnel may be 
of the return flow variety, in which case provision must be made for the excess 
air to be blown off from the return passage. 
It is one thing to obtain a high Mach Number in a wind tunnel -- it is quite 
another thing also to obtain a high Reynolds Number (see Appendix 2) and so 
eliminate scale effect. This brings in the question of high-density tunnels, low- 
density tunnels, cryogenic (low temperature tunnels) and even the use of gases 
other than air; this interesting problem will be touched on in Appendix 2, but 
it is really beyond the scope of this book. 
A simple and fascinating way of observing patterns very similar to shock- 
wave patterns is by using what is sometimes called the hydraulic analogy. 
Anyone who has watched the bow wave, and other wave patterns caused by 
a ship making its way through water, and has also seen the shock-wave pat- 
terns in air flowing at supersonic speed, must have been struck by the 
similarity of the patterns. If bodies of various shapes are moved at quite mod- 
erate speeds across the surface of water (not totally immersed), or the water 
made to flow past the bodies, many shock-wave phenomena can be illustrated 
and, by a suitable system of lighting, thrown on to a screen. Some people say 
that such demonstrations are too convincing, because they make one think 
that it is the same thing -- which of course it isn't. The patterns are similar but 
the angles and so on of the waves are different. 
Finally, we come to full-scale or free-flight testing, and even this may be 
divided into two types, tests with piloted aircraft and those with pilotless air- 
craft or missiles. Not only are these the eventual tests, but in the case of 
320 MECHANICS OF FLIGHT 
If return flow type 
excess air is blown 
off during return 
Air injected 
under pressure 
Can be of return 
flow type 
Induced 
flow 
Working 
section 
Model 
Diffuser 
Induced 
flow 
Injected 
and 
induced 
flow 
Air injected 
under pressure 
Fig 11.11 High-speed wind tunnel: induced flow type 
transonic flight, in particular, they have also been the pioneer tests and most 
of them have been made in piloted aircraft. In the early investigations, piloted 
aircraft certainly had their limitations because we could only approach the 
speed of sound in a dive; this had rather obvious and rather serious disadvan- 
tages. It took a long time (and a lot of height lost) to reach the critical speeds 
and then, if the symptoms were alarming -- as they sometimes were -- we were 
unpleasantly near the ground by the time a recovery could be made; moreover 
the making of such a recovery was not made any easier if the symptoms were 
severe buffeting, or worse -- a further dropping of the nose and steepening of 
the dive -- or worse still -- heaviness of the controls so severe that they could 
not be moved. In such circumstances the point made in an earlier paragraph 
that the Mach Number might be decreasing as we hurtled towards the ground 
was hardly sufficient consolation. 
As the thrust of jet engines increased -- and it was this thrust which made 
even the approach of the speed of sound possible -- the shock stall could be 
reached in level flight in some types of aircraft, and later still in climbing flight. 
This was an altogether different proposition from the pilot's point of view and, 
as testing at transonic speeds lost its terrors, our knowledge increased corre- 
spondingly more rapidly. 
Test on bullets and shells moving through the air at supersonic speeds have 
been made on ballistic ranges since before the days of practical flight, and pho- 
tographs of shock waves were taken more than 60 years ago, but it was only 
when aircraft themselves began to approach the speed of sound that the sig- 
nificance of such tests in respect of aircraft design began to be realised; and it 
was the development of the ramjet and rocket as means of driving missiles, 
and the parallel development of electronic instruments which could not only 
guide the missiles but take readings and keep records during the flight -- in 
some cases even transmitting them back to earth -- it was these that con- 
tributed most of all to our knowledge, and to the solution of the problems of 
transonic and supersonic flight. 
So we can sum up the experimental methods that have been used to inves- 
tigate these problems as coming under the following headings -- 
(a) Photography of shock waves. 
(b) High-speed wind tunnels. 
(c) The hydraulic analogy. 
(d) Free flight in piloted aircraft. 
(e) Rockets and missiles. 
Now let us see what all this has taught us. 
321 
FLIGHT AT TRANSONIC SPEEDS 
Shock--wave patterns 
In an earlier paragraph we described how a shock wave is formed at a speed 
of about three-quarters of the speed of sound, i.e. at about M 0.75. On a 
symmetrical wing at zero angle of attack the incipient shock wave appears on 
both top and bottom surfaces simultaneously, approximately at right angles to 
the surfaces, and, as one would expect, at about the point of maximum 
camber (Fig. 11.12b). On a wing at a small angle of attack, even if the aero- 
foil section is symmetrical, the incipient shock wave appears first on the top 
surface only (Fig. 11A) -- again as one would expect, because it is on the top 
surface that the speed of the airflow first approaches the speed of sound. 
Figure 11.12 shows how the shock-wave pattern changes (on a symmetri- 
cally shaped sharp-nosed aerofoil at zero angle of attack) as the speed of 
airflow is increased from subsonic, through the transonic range to fully super- 
sonic flow. 
Between the formation of the incipient wave (at a Mach Number of about 
0.75 or 0.8) and the time when the wing as a whole is moving through the air 
at a speed of sound (M 1.0), the shock wave tends to move backwards, but 
in doing so becomes stronger and extends farther out from the surface, while 
there is even more violent turbulence behind it (Fig. 11.12c). At a speed just 
above that of sound another wave appears, in the form of a bow wave, some 
distance ahead of the leading edge; and the original wave, which is now at the 
trailing edge, tends to become curved, and shaped rather like a fish tail (Fig. 
11.12d). As the speed is further increased the bow wave attaches itself to the 
leading edge, and the angles formed between both waves and the surfaces 
become more acute (Fig. 11.12e). Still further increases of speed have little 
effect on the general shock-wave pattern -- but here we are trespassing on 
supersonic flight, which is the subject of the next chapter. 
At each wave there is a sudden increase of pressure, and density, and tem- 
perature, a decrease in velocity, and a slight change in direction of the airflow. 
The thickness of a shock wave, through which these changes take place, is only 
of the order of 2 to 3 thousandths of a millimetre -- they look thicker on pho- 
tographs because it is not possible to get a perfectly plane shock wave in the 
experiment. The changes at the shock wave are irreversible, which is another 
way of saying that the losses, which lead to wave drag, cannot be recovered. 
It is interesting to note, however, that the incipient waves only extend a short 
distance from the surface, and leaks are possible round the ends of the waves; 
as speed increases the waves extend and there is less and less possibility of such 
leaks. It is interesting to note, too, that the decrease in velocity, which occurs 
behind the shock wave, means that when an aircraft is moving through the air, 
and a shock wave is formed, the air behind the shock wave begins to move in 
the direction in which the aircraft is travelling. 
In addition to showing the shock-wave patterns, Fig. 11.12 also indicates 
the areas in which the flow is subsonic or supersonic. In (a) at M 0.6 it is all 
322 MECHANICS OF FLIGHT 
323 
FLIGHT AT TRANSONIC SPEEDS 
Subsonic flow 
Subsonic flow 
Subsonic 
flow 
(a)M=0.6 
Incipient shock wave 
Sudden increase of pressure and density 
Fall in velocity 
Supersonic 
Supersonic flow 
Supersonic 
Subsonic flow 
Subsonic flow 
(b)M=0.8 
Fully developed shock wave 
Increase of pressure and density 
Fall in velocity 
Supersonic flow 
Sonic 
flow 
Subsonic flow 
Subsonic flow 
(c)M=1.0 
Supersonic 
flow 
Bow wave approaching 
from front 
Original shock wave 
now at tail 
(d)M=1.1 
Supersonic 
Supersonic 
Supersonic 
Supersonic 
Fully developed 
bow wave 
Fully developed 
tail wave 
Supersonic 
flow 
Supersonic 
Supersonic 
Supersonic 
Supersonic (e) M = 2.0 
Subsonic 
flow 
Subsonic 
Sub 
Fig 11.12 Development of shock waves at increasing mach numbers 
(a) Subsonic speeds. No shock wave. Breakaway at transition point. 
(b) At critical Mach Number. First shock wave develops. 
(c) At speed of sound. Shock wave stronger and moving back. 
(d) Transonic speeds. Bow wave appears from front. Original wave at tail. 
(e) Fully supersonic flow. Fully developed waves at bow and tail. 
subsonic (clearly we are still in the subsonic region); at M 0.8 the flow 
immediately in front of the shock wave is supersonic, but all the remainder is 
subsonic (we are now in the transonic region with both types of flow); at M 
1 the area of supersonic flow has increased but the flow behind the shock wave 
is still subsonic (as we shall learn later it is always subsonic behind a shock 
wave that is at right angles to the flow, it can only be supersonic behind an 
inclined or oblique shock wave); at M 1.1 nearly all the flow is supersonic, 
but there are still small regions of subsonic flow, immediately in front of the 
leading edge at what is called the stagnation point where the flow is brought 
to rest, and immediately behind the trailing edge (we are still in the transonic 
region, but not for much longer); at M 2 the flow is all supersonic -- we are 
through the barrier (though to be strictly correct, unless the bow wave is actu- 
ally attached to the leading edge, which will only happen if the edge is very 
sharp, there will still be a small area of subsonic flow at the stagnation point 
between the bow wave and the leading edge; and of course in the boundary 
layer itself the air immediately next to the surface is at rest relative to the 
surface, and most of the remainder of the airflow in the boundary layer is sub- 
sonic). 
The figure also shows how the extent of the separated region, or thickened 
boundary layer tends to decrease with increasing Mach Number, and this sug- 
gests that as wave drag becomes relatively more important, boundary layer 
drag becomes relatively less so. This may also give a clue to the decrease in 
drag coefficient as we pass through the barrier (Fig. 11.7). 
The reader should now be able to draw for himself the shock patterns, cor- 
responding to those of Fig. 11.12 for an aerofoil inclined at a small angle of 
attack, and the exercise in doing so will help him to appreciate how and why 
shock waves are formed. 
Figure 11B (on page 306) is a remarkable example of condensation and 
shock waves on an aeroplane in flight with, below, a Schlieren photograph of 
shock waves on a model of the same aircraft. More shock waves on an aero- 
foil are shown in Fig. 11F at the end of this chapter. 
Shock waves and pressure distribution 
It has already been stated that at the shock stall, as at the high incidence stall, 
there are sudden changes both in lift and drag; and it is only to be expected 
that these are due in the main to changes in the pressure distribution over the 
wings or other surfaces. So pressure plotting has been as important a feature 
of research into the problems of high-speed flight as into those of subsonic 
flight, and the connection between the shock patterns and pressure distri- 
bution is naturally of great interest and importance. 
It must be remembered that when we were originally considering the shapes 
of aerofoil sections in Chapter 3, the so-called laminar flow aerofoil (Fig 3.22) 
324 MECHANICS OF FLIGHT 
proved of great value at speeds of 140 m/s upwards. The characteristics of this 
section were comparative thinness and gently graduated camber, with the 
point of maximum camber farther back than on slow-speed types. As a result 
of this shape -- in fact it was the purpose of it -- the airflow speeded up very 
gradually and the distribution of decreased pressure over the upper surface 
was much more even than for the slower types on which there was a marked 
peak of suction quite near the leading edge (Fig. 3.8). We naturally approached 
the transonic region with aerofoil sections of this type, and so in considering 
the pressure distribution diagrams we must expect a fairly even distribution of 
decreased pressure on the top surface before the shock waves appear (this will 
be evident in Figs 11.13 and 11.14, overleaf). 
Figure 11.13 shows in a very realistic way how the decrease in pressure, or 
suction, on the upper surface of a wing is affected by the formation of a shock 
wave when the wing as a whole is moving near the critical Mach Number. It 
shows the local Mach Number of flow across the surface of the wing; pressure 
of course depends on the speed, and hence Mach Number; the higher the local 
speed the less the pressure (back to Bernoulli again). The pressure scale is not 
given since compressibility effects complicate the issue considerably, but qual- 
itatively Figure 11.13 gives the right idea. 
Figure 11.14 is rather more complicated, but it is worth trying to under- 
stand because it demonstrates so clearly the practical effect of the shock waves 
on the pressure distribution -- this time on both top and bottom surfaces, and 
for a symmetrical wing section at a small angle of attack -- and the resultant 
effect on the lift and drag coefficient of the wing over the transonic range. 
325 
FLIGHT AT TRANSONIC SPEEDS 
Pressure decreasing 
Suction on upper surface of wing
Local speed of flow over wing
Effect of shock wave 
Sudden increase 
of pressure 
M=2 
M=1 
M=0 
L.E 
T.E. 
Supersonic 
Subsonic 
Subsonic 
flow 
at critical 
Mach 
Number 
Speed flow increasing 
Pressure increasing to 
that at T.E. 
Fig 11.13 Shock wave and pressure distribution 
326 MECHANICS OF FLIGHT 
Decrease of pressure 
Local speed of flow 
Full line: Pressure on top surface
Dashed line: Pressure on bottom surface
Shock
pattern
C.P.
M=1
M=2
M=0
M=1
M=2
M=0
(a)
M
0.75
M 0.75
(b)
C.P.
M
0.81
M 0.81
C.P.
(c)
C.P.
M
0.89
M 0.89
C.P.
(d)
C.P.
M
0.98
M 0.98
C.P.
(e)
C.P.
C.P.
M 1.4
(f)
CL
at
2°
0.5
1.0
1.5
Mach Number
(g)
CD
at
2°
0.5
1.0
1.5
Mach Number
M 0.81
M=1.4
C.P.
M 0.98
M 0.89
M 0.75
M 1.4
M 0.98
M 0.81
M 0.75
M 0.89
M 1.4
Fig 11.14 Shock-wave patterns and pressure distribution
Symmetrical bi-convex section at 2° angle of attack.
Incidentally, too, the figure gives a partial answer to the exercise suggested at 
the end of the previous paragraph, but perhaps the reader tackled that exer- 
cise before reading on! 
At (a), (b), (c), (d), and (e) in the figure, which illustrate what happens at 
Mach Numbers of 0.75, 0.81, 0.89, 0.98, and 1.4 respectively, we see first the 
shock patterns at these speeds. All refer to a symmetrical bi-convex aerofoil 
section at an angle of attack of 2°. Above the shock pattern is shown the cor- 
responding Mach Number distribution, across the chord; the full line 
representing the upper surface and the dotted line the lower one; decreased 
pressure is indicated upwards, as this corresponds to increasing Mach 
Number. It is the difference between the full line and the dotted line which 
shows how effective in providing lift is that part of the aerofoil section; if the 
dotted line is above the full line the lift is negative. The total lift is represented 
by the area between the lines, and the centre of pressure by the centre of area. 
Increasing speed, which is proportional to the decreasing pressure, is also 
shown upwards. 
On the vertical scale on each diagram is a Mach Number of 1, i.e. the speed 
of sound, and the free stream Mach Number, i.e. the Mach Number at which 
the aeroplane as a whole is moving through the air. Thus we can see at a glance 
over what parts of the surfaces, upper or lower, the local airflow is subsonic 
or supersonic, and over what parts its speed is above or below that at which 
the aerofoil is travelling. 
Parts ( f ) and (g) of the figure show the lift coefficient and drag coefficient 
corresponding to each diagram. Of these the lift curve is most interesting, 
partly because we have already seen the drag curve in Fig. 11.7, but more 
because the drag is not revealed by the pressure distribution to the same extent 
as the lift is, and in fact the pressure distribution does not show the important 
part of the drag that is tangential to the surface at all. 
Figure 11.14 should be studied at leisure; it tells a long story -- too long for 
me to point out every detail. But let us just look at some of the more important 
points. 
Part (a) of course, is the subsonic picture, except that separation has already 
become apparent near the trailing edge and there is practically no net lift over 
the rear third of the aerofoil section; the centre of pressure is well forward and, 
as ( f ) shows, the lift coefficient is quite good and is rising steadily; the drag 
coefficient, on the other hand, is only just beginning to rise. 
In (b) the incipient shock wave has appeared on the top surface; notice the 
sudden increase of pressure (shown by the falling line) and decrease of speed 
at the shock wave. The centre of pressure has moved back a little, but the area 
is large, i.e. the lift is good (see ( f )), and the drag (g) is rising rapidly. 
The pressure distribution in (c) shows very clearly why there is a sudden 
drop in lift coefficient (see ( f )) before the aerofoil as a whole reaches the speed 
of sound; on the rear portion of the wing the lift is negative because the suction 
on the top surface has been spoilt by the shock wave, while there is still quite 
good suction and high-speed flow on the lower surface. On the front portion 
327 
FLIGHT AT TRANSONIC SPEEDS 
there is nearly as much suction on the lower surface as on the upper. The 
centre of pressure has now moved well forward again; the drag is increasing 
rapidly (g). 
Part (d) is particularly interesting because it shows the important results of 
the shock waves moving to the trailing edge, so no longer spoiling the suction 
or causing separation. The speed of flow over the surfaces is nearly all super- 
sonic, the centre of pressure has gone back to about half chord, and owing to 
the good suction over nearly all the top surface, with rather less on the bottom, 
the lift coefficient has actually increased (see ( f )). The drag coefficient is just 
about at its maximum. 
At (e) we are through the transonic region. The bow wave has appeared. 
For the first time the speed of flow over about half of both surfaces is less than 
the Mach Number of 1.4 of the aerofoil as a whole. The lift coefficient has 
fallen again, because the pressures on both surfaces are nearly the same; and 
this time -- for the first time since the critical Mach Number -- the drag coeffi- 
cient has fallen considerably. 
Sonic bangs 
We are now all too familiar with the noises made by aircraft 'breaking the 
sound barrier', not to mention those unfortunate people who have suffered 
damage to property as a result. These so-called sonic bangs, or booms, are of 
course, caused by shock waves, generated by an aircraft, and striking the ears 
of an observer on the ground, or his glasshouses or whatever it may be; but 
there has been considerable argument as to the exact circumstances which 
result in the shock waves being heard, why there are often two or more dis- 
tinct bangs, whether the second one came first, and so on. 
Strangely enough many people don't seem to realise that we were familiar 
with sonic bangs, and their effects on us and our property, long before aircraft 
flew at all. A crack of the whip is probably the oldest man-made example; it 
may not have been responsible for breaking glasshouses, but in the hands of a 
circus performer it can be a pretty shattering noise. A roll or a clap of thunder 
is an example from nature of a series of shock waves; and one must have 
noticed how the bangs produced by aircraft often resemble a short roll of 
thunder. Explosions, too, produce shock waves, and, although a bombing raid 
is hardly an appropriate time to analyse such things, there were many unfortu- 
nate enough to experience during the war the disastrous effects on their ears and 
property of the shock wave of an exploding bomb, as distinct from the damage 
caused by the bomb itself. Some, too, may even have noticed the rather weird 
way in which the different bangs arrived at different times depending on where 
the observer was relative to the launching and explosion of the bomb. But the 
nearest thing to the sonic bangs produced by aircraft are the crack of a rifle 
bullet, or of a shell going overhead, or of the V2 rocket of wartime memory. 
328 MECHANICS OF FLIGHT 
If an aircraft were to fly at supersonic speed at a height of a few feet over 
one's head the shock waves from wings, body, tail, etc., would strike one's ears 
in rapid succession, so rapid that one couldn't distinguish between them, and 
(if one remained conscious at all) the impression, so far as noise is concerned, 
would probably be of a short roll of thunder. The higher the aircraft flew, the 
less violent would be the noise produced by the shock until it would hardly be 
noticed at all from the ground; the noise of the engine, and of the aircraft itself, 
are of course continuous noises which are quite distinct from that of the shock. 
An aircraft diving towards the earth at supersonic speed, and at an angle of 
say 45°, then suddenly slowing up and changing direction, will 'shed' its shock 
waves, which will travel on towards the earth and strike any observers who 
may happen to be in their path. It is certainly quite clear from schlieren pho- 
tographs that a bow wave approaches from the front as the speed of sound is 
approached, and, conversely, goes ahead of the aircraft when it decelerates 
below the speed of sound. 
So far as effects at ground level are concerned, we know that these become 
less intense with the height of the aircraft; more intense with Mach Number, 
though not anything like in proportion; that they are affected by the dimen- 
sions of the aircraft, increasing with its weight and volume, and being of 
longer duration according to its length; that they are more intense during 
accelerated flight (when the shocks tend to coalesce) than in steady flight; and 
that they decrease very rapidly with lateral displacement from the line of flight 
of the aircraft, in fact they only extend over a certain lateral distance. All this 
is rather what one might expect, but the problem is complicated because 
shocks of different intensities may be generated by the body, wings, tail and 
other parts of the aircraft, hence sometimes the roll as of thunder rather than 
one or two sharp bangs. One factor that one might not expect is the extent to 
which the bangs vary according to the conditions in the atmosphere between 
the aircraft and the ground, the winds, temperature, turbulence and so on. The 
actual pressures created at ground level are not so great as is sometimes 
thought; the overpressure in the Concorde boom, for instance, was only of the 
order of 96 newtons per square metre. 
Can anything be done about it? Not much; if we insist on flying at these 
speeds. We can legislate against supersonic flight other than over the sea or 
thinly populated areas, but even so aircraft have to reach these areas. 
Moreover the tendency must be for the weight and size of such aircraft to 
increase rather than the reverse. Some alleviation can be obtained by control 
of climbing speeds; and at certain heights the speed of sound may be exceeded 
without creating a boom at all, the shock wave being dissipated before it 
reaches the ground. So really there is nothing for it but to fly as much as poss- 
ible over the sea, and as high as possible, perhaps even really high -- as we shall 
mention in the last paragraphs of this book. 
Finally it should be mentioned that the publicity that has been given to 
sonic booms has tended to make us forget all the other noises created by air- 
craft, those from the engines, propellers or jets, and from the motion of the 
329 
FLIGHT AT TRANSONIC SPEEDS 
aircraft itself; these noises are probably more objectionable than sonic booms 
to those who live on landing or take-off paths, they are by no means confined 
to transonic and supersonic aircraft, and there are better prospects of reducing 
some of these noises as, for example, by using quieter engines. 
Raising the critical Mach Number -- slimness 
When increase in engine thrust -- due to the rapid development of jet engines 
-- first made transonic flight possible, research was concentrated on the 
problem of raising the critical Mach Number, of postponing the shock stall, of 
getting as near to the barrier as possible without getting into it -- in short, of 
keeping out of trouble rather than facing it. 
There are two main ways of raising the critical Mach Number. The first is 
slimness. The need for slimness will be abundantly clear from all that has been 
said about shock waves and their effects -- and the slimness applies to all parts, 
the aerofoil section, the body, the engine nacelles, the fin, tail plane and control 
surfaces, and perhaps most of all to small excrescences (if there must be such 
things) on the aircraft. The aerofoil section must be of the low-drag laminar- 
flow type already referred to, and must have a very low ratio of thickness to 
chord. The Spitfire of the Second World War has already been mentioned as 
an example of slimness, and of a high critical Mach Number -- all the more 
remarkable in that it was not designed for transonic speeds. 
The full line in Fig. 11.15 shows very clearly the effect of thickness/chord 
ratio on the critical Mach Number for a straight wing (the dotted line will be 
referred to in the next paragraph); at a t/c ratio of 10 per cent this wing has a 
critical Mach Number of only just over 0.8, at a t/c ratio of 8 per cent it is 
raised to 0.85, and at 4 per cent it is over 0.9. Not long ago the t/c ratios of 
wings for fighter aircraft were from 9 to 12 per cent, but they have now been 
reduced to 7 or 8 per cent, and may yet be still further reduced to a figure as 
low as 3 per cent, though there are of course very great design and manufac- 
turing difficulties in producing such thin wings. In thus speaking of thin wings 
it is important to keep in mind that what really matters is not the actual thick- 
ness, but the ratio of thickness to chord. 
Raising the critical Mach Number -- sweepback 
The second main way of raising the critical Mach Number (and this applies 
only to the wings, tail, fin and control surfaces) is sweepback -- not just the few 
degrees of sweepback that was sometimes used, rather apologetically and for 
various and sometimes rather doubtful reasons, on subsonic aircraft, but 40°, 
50°, 70° or more. 
330 MECHANICS OF FLIGHT 
Sweepback of this magnitude not only delays the shock stall, but reduces its 
severity when it does occur. The theory behind this is that it is only the com- 
ponent of the velocity across the chord of the wing (V cos a) which is 
responsible for the pressure distribution and so for causing the shock wave 
(Fig. 11.16); the component V sin a along the span of the wing causes only 
frictional drag. This theory is borne out by the fact that when it does appear 
the shock wave lies parallel to the span of the wing, and only that part of the 
velocity perpendicular to the shock wave, i.e. across the chord, is reduced by 
the shock wave to subsonic speeds. As the figure clearly shows, the greater the 
sweepback the smaller will be the component of the velocity which is affected, 
331 
FLIGHT AT TRANSONIC SPEEDS 
t/c % 
t/c 10% 
t/c 8% 
t/c 6% 
t/c 4% 
10 
9 
8 
7 
6 
5 
4 
3 
0.8 
0.85 
0.9 
0.95 
1.0 
Critical Mach Number 
45° sweepback 
Straight wing 
Fig 11.15 Critical Mach Number and t/c ratio 
a 
Vcosa V sina 
V 
Flow 
across 
chord 
Flow 
along 
span 
a 
Fig 11.16 Sweepback -- components of velocity 
332 MECHANICS OF FLIGHT 
CD 
Critical 
Mach 
Numbers 
Straight 
wing 
Mach Number 
30° 
45° 
0.8 1.0 1.2 1.4 1.6 1.8 2.0 2.2 
Aspect ratio, 3 
t/c ratio, 5% 
Fig 11.17 Effects of sweepback 
V 
Delta 
Crescent 
Fig 11.18 Swept-back wings for transonic speeds 
and so the higher will be the critical Mach Number, and the less will be the 
drag at all transonic speeds of a wing of the same t/c ratio and at the same 
angle of attack. 
Experiment confirms the theoretical advantages of sweepback, though the 
improvement is not quite so great as the theory suggests. The dotted line in 
Fig. 11.15 shows how a wing swept back at 45° has a higher critical Mach 
Number than a straight wing at all values of t/c ratio, the advantage being 
greater for the wings with the higher values of t/c. Figure 11.17 tells us even 
more; it shows that sweepback not only increases the critical Mach Number, 
but it reduces the rate at which the drag coefficient rises (the slope of the 
curve), and it lowers the peak of the drag coefficient -- and 45° of sweepback 
does all this better than 30°. Incidentally this figure also shows that, above 
about M 2, sweepback has very little advantage -- but that is another story 
and, in any case, aeroplanes cannot fly at M 2 without first going through 
the transonic range. 
Figure 11.18 shows various plan forms of swept-back wings. 
Of course, as always, there are snags, and the heavily swept-back wing is 
no exception. There is tip stalling -- an old problem, but a very important one; 
in the crescent-shaped wing (Fig. 11.18) an attempt has been made -- with 
some success -- to alleviate this by gradually reducing the sweepback from root 
to tip. CLmax is low, and therefore the stalling speed is high, and CLmax is 
obtained at too large an angle to be suitable for landing -- another old 
problem, and one that can generally be overcome by special slots, flaps or 
suction devices. There are also control problems of various kinds, and the 
designer doesn't like the extra bending and twisting stresses that are inherent 
in the heavily swept-back wing design. But whatever the problems sweepback 
seems to have come to stay -- at least for aircraft which are designed to fly for 
any length of time at transonic or low supersonic speeds. 
Control problems 
Reference has already been made to the unpleasant things that may happen to 
aircraft as they go through the speed of sound -- violent changes of trim, up or 
down, oscillations, buffeting, and so on. In such circumstances the first essen- 
tial from the pilot's point of view is that he should have complete control; and 
so be master of the aircraft and its movements. 
Unfortunately this is by no means easy to provide -- and for several reasons. 
Consider, for instance, an ordinary tail plane and elevator. At subsonic 
speeds an elevator depends for its effectiveness on the complete change of flow 
which occurs over both tail plane and elevator when the elevator is raised or 
depressed; the actual forces which control the aircraft are in fact much greater 
on the tail plane than they are on the elevator itself. Now as soon as a shock 
wave is formed on the tail plane -- and the most likely place for its formation 
is at the hinge between tail plane and elevator -- a movement of the elevator 
cannot affect the flow in front of the shock wave, so we have to rely entirely 
on the forces on the elevator itself to effect control. But the elevator will be in 
the turbulent flow behind the shock wave, and so may itself be very ineffective 
in producing the control forces required. 
At higher speeds, when the shock wave moves back over the elevator, the 
opposite trouble may occur, and the forces on the elevator may be so great that 
it becomes almost immovable. 
The answer to these troubles has been found in the all-moving slab type of 
tail plane (Fig. 5H) -- sometimes given the rather curious name of a flying tail 
-- and in making this power-operated. In this way we have what at the same 
time is an adjustable tail plane and an elevator. 
The same principle can be applied to the ailerons -- by having all-moving 
wing tips -- and, more rarely, to the rudder, by having a combined fin and 
rudder. 
But this is not the only high-speed control problem. Another is the possi- 
bility of reversal of the controls, owing to the distortion of the structure by the 
great forces on the control surfaces. This is most likely to happen on the 
ailerons. Suppose, for instance, that the starboard aileron is lowered in order 
to raise the starboard wing -- if the force on the aileron is very great it will tend 
to twist the wing in such a way as to reduce its angle of attack, and so reduce 
the lift instead of increasing the lift on that wing; and the net result is that the 
333 
FLIGHT AT TRANSONIC SPEEDS 
wing will fall instead of rise. The aileron is acting on the wing just as a control 
tab is intended to act on a control surface; but that is little consolation to the 
pilot, and it doesn't take much imagination to realise his horror when a move- 
ment of the control column has exactly the opposite effect to that intended! 
Nor is it an easy problem for the designer to solve since the extra weight 
involved in providing sufficient stiffness, especially on thin and heavily swept- 
back wings, may be prohibitive. So as well as requiring power-generated 
controls, special high-speed ailerons may be needed -- these are situated well 
inboard where the structure is stiffer instead of at the tips. Another solution is 
to use 'spoilers' instead of ailerons. These are small flaps which come out of 
the top surface of the wing and disrupt the local flow, thus reducing lift on that 
wing and giving rolling control. 
The introduction of power-operated controls has in itself caused a new 
problem in that the pilot no longer 'feels' the pressure resisting the movement 
of the controls; this feel was always a safety factor in that it made the pilot 
conscious of the forces he was applying, and in fact there was some advantage 
in that there was a limit to what he could do to the aeroplane owing to the 
sheer limitation of his strength. So important is this matter of feel that when 
power-operated controls are used it has been necessary to incorporate artificial 
or synthetic 'feel'; and this is made even more real by grading it so that it varies 
not only with the movement of the control surface but with the density of the 
air and the air speed, in other words with the dynamic or stagnation pressure, 
rV2 or q -- it is sometimes called 'q-feel'. Quite apart from the safety aspect, 
this synthetic feel gives the pilot a sense of control over the aeroplane which 
restores something of the art of flying. 
But this is not the only problem resulting from the use of powered controls. 
If the power fails, and if there is no means of reverting to manual operation, 
the control may lock solid and the pilot be denied the use of rudder, elevators 
or ailerons. The answer to this is to introduce a safety factor by having more 
than one control surface, each having a separate power control; thus the 
Concorde had two rudders, one above the other, and six elevons (combined 
elevators and ailerons, which is the usual arrangement on delta or highly- 
swept wings). The Russian counterpart even had eight elevons. 
Again on delta and highly-swept wings there is sometimes an interesting use 
of spoilers, this time as an aid to longitudinal control. Large aircraft flying at 
high speed, with their considerable inertia, are slow to respond to the eleva- 
tors, just as they are to the ailerons. If one set of spoilers is fitted inboard (i.e. 
close to the fuselage) on each wing, and so forward of the aerodynamic centre; 
and another set is fitted well outboard and so, owing to the sweepback, behind 
the aerodynamic centre; and these are then linked to the elevator control in 
such a way that the fore and aft sets can be operated differentially, they will 
cause a movement of the centre of pressure which will aid the elevator control, 
just as when they are operated differentially on the port and starboard wings 
they assist the ailerons in providing lateral control, as described above. 
12 
334 MECHANICS OF FLIGHT 
Area rule 
We should by now realise that if the drag is to be kept to a minimum at tran- 
sonic speeds, bodies must be slim and smooth, and have 'clean lines'. What is 
the significance of clean lines? Well, it is often said to be in the eye of the 
beholder, what looks right is right -- yes, but it depends on who looks at it; and 
a little calculation, a little rule, formula, or whatever it may be will often aid our 
eyes in designing the best shapes for definite purposes. The area rule (Fig. 11C) 
is simply one of these rules, and put in its simplest form it means that the area 
of cross-section should increase gradually to a maximum, then decrease gradu- 
ally; in this sense a streamline shape obeys the area rule, though for transonic 
speeds, and indeed for high subsonic speeds, the maximum cross-sectional area 
should be about half-way, rather than one-third of the way back, this giving a 
more gradual increase of cross-sectional area with an equally gradual decrease. 
The body in Fig. 11.19 (overleaf) obeys the area rule -- but it hasn't got any 
wings. If we add a projection to a body, such as the wings to a fuselage, we shall 
get a sudden jump in the cross-sectional area -- and that means that the area rule 
is not being obeyed. What then can we do? -- the answer is that we must decrease 
the cross-sectional area of the fuselage as we add the cross-sectional area of the 
wings in such a way that the total cross-sectional area of the aeroplane increases 
gradually. Similarly behind the point of maximum cross-sectional area it is the 
total cross-sectional area that must be gradually decreased. 
335 
FLIGHT AT TRANSONIC SPEEDS 
Fig 11C Transonic area rule 
The transonic British Aerospace Buccaneer which finally saw action in the 
Gulf War shortly before retirement. The bulge in the rear fuselage is for 
purposes of area rule. 
It will be realised that the application of this rule gives a waist to the fuse- 
lage where wings or other parts such as the tail plane are attached (Figs 11.19 
and 11.20). It will be realised, too, that sweepback -- in addition to its other 
advantages -- is to some extent an area rule in itself so far as the wings are con- 
cerned, the cross-sectional area being added gradually, and so the waisting of 
the fuselage will be less marked with swept-back wings than with straight 
wings. 
Vortex generators 
Many devices are used by the designer to control the separation or breakaway 
of the airflow from the surface of the wing -- all these devices, in one way or 
another, over one part of the wing or another, have this in common, that they 
are intended to prevent or delay this breakaway. How? Well, that depends to 
some extent on the device, and we will consider vortex generators first (Fig. 
11D). 
The fundamental reason for the breakaway is that the boundary layer 
becomes sluggish over the rear part of the wing section, flowing as it is against 
the pressure gradient. The formation of a shock wave makes matters worse; 
the speed in the boundary layer is still subsonic which means that pressure can 
be transmitted up stream, causing the boundary layer to thicken and, if the 
pressure rise is too steep, to break away from the surface. Now vortex gener- 
ators are small plates or wedges, projecting an inch or so from the top surface 
of the wing, i.e. three or four times the thickness of the boundary layer. Their 
purpose is to put new life into a sluggish boundary layer; this they do by shed- 
ding small lively vortices which act as scavengers, making the boundary layer 
turbulent and causing it to mix with and acquire extra energy from the sur- 
rounding faster air, thus helping it to go farther along the surface before being 
336 MECHANICS OF FLIGHT 
Nose 
Rear of fuselage 
is cut off for 
jet efflux 
Fig 11.19 Area rule -- plan view of fuselage without wings or tail 
Fig 11.20 Area rule -- effect of wings and tail on plan view of fuselage 
slowed up and separating from the surface. In this way the small drag which 
they create is far more than compensated by the considerable boundary layer 
drag which they save, and in fact they may also weaken the shock waves and 
so reduce shock drag also; and the vorticity which they generate can actually 
serve to prevent buffeting of the aircraft as a whole -- a clever idea indeed, and 
so simple. The net effect is very much the same as blowing or sucking the 
boundary layer, but the device is so much lighter in weight and simpler. The 
greater the value of the thickness/chord ratio the more necessary does some 
such device become. 
There are various types of vortex generator; Fig. 11.21 illustrates the bent- 
tin type, which may be co-rotating or contra-rotating. The plates are inclined 
at about 15° to the airflow, and on a wing are usually situated on the upper 
surface fairly near the leading edge. 
Other devices to prevent or delay separation 
There are several other devices which have been used to prevent or delay sep- 
aration of the boundary layer, and so allay the rapid increase in drag at the 
sonic barrier, or the buffeting, or violent changes in trim which are liable to 
occur as a result of shock waves or separation, or some or all of these troubles. 
337 
FLIGHT AT TRANSONIC SPEEDS 
Fig 11D Vortex generators 
The Buccaneer again, showing vortex generators on the outer wing. This 
'fix' was used to improve wing flow attachment on many early swept-wing 
aircraft. 
A thickened trailing edge is sometimes employed; this causes vortices which 
have much the same effect as those created by vortex generators, though natu- 
rally the effect is not felt so far forward on the wing surface. 
On heavily swept-back wings fences (Figs 11.22) are often fitted; these are 
vanes of similar height to vortex generators, but running fore and aft across 
the top surface of the wing, and designed to check any spanwise flow of air 
along the wing, for this in turn is likely to cause a breakaway of the flow near 
the wing tips and so lead to tip stalling, particularly on swept wings. 
Another problem with highly swept wings is the tendency for the flow to 
separate in the tip region first. This causes all sorts of problems, for example 
large changes in pitching moment. This effect may be reduced by introducing 
a notch or saw-tooth in the leading edge (Figs 11.23 and 11E). The notch also 
generates a strong vortex which controls the boundary layer in the tip region. 
Leading-edge droop and leading-edge flaps are becoming quite common 
features of high-speed aircraft, but these are to prevent separation of the flow 
at the low-speed end of the range, i.e. at large angles of attack, and so help to 
solve one of the main problems of aircraft designed for transonic and super- 
sonic speeds, that of making them fly safely slowly. A permanent droop is 
called leading-edge droop or droop-snoot; when it is adjustable it is called a 
leading-edge flap. Either may be combined with trailing-edge flaps and other 
devices, and Fig. 11.24 (overleaf) illustrates a combination of leading-edge 
droop, double slotted trailing-edge flaps, and air brakes -- all helping to the 
same end. 
But to conclude the problems of flight at transonic speeds on an optimistic 
note, it can generally be said that once one has a good transonic shape, it 
338 MECHANICS OF FLIGHT 
Leading edge 
Co-rotating type 
Contra-rotating type 
Plan views 
Elevation 
Leading edge 
Fig 11.21 Vortex generators: bent-tin type 
Fig 11.22 A boundary layer fence 
339 
FLIGHT AT TRANSONIC SPEEDS 
Fig 11.23 Leading edge saw-tooth or dog-tooth 
Fig 11E Saw-tooth or dog-tooth 
(By courtesy of McDonnell Douglas Corporation, USA) 
The Phantom (RAF version), showing clearly the dog-tooth on the leading 
edge; the outer wings have 12° dihedral; there are blown leading and 
trailing edge flaps; the slab tail has 15° anhedral and a fixed slot; the 
rudder is inter-connected with the ailerons at low speeds. 
remains good, and the flow around it changes little between subsonic and tran- 
sonic speeds. 
Can you answer these? 
1. Is the speed at which sound travels in water higher or lower than that at 
which it travels in air? 
2. Does the speed of sound change with height -- if so, why? 
3. At what part of a wing does a shock wave first form? 
340 MECHANICS OF FLIGHT 
Fig 11.24 Leading edge flap, double-slotted trailing edge flap and 
air brake 
Fig 11F Shock waves 
Shock waves from an aerofoil at incidence to the flow. Note the stronger 
leading edge shock on the underside. The wave in the top left-hand 
corner is a reflection from the wind-tunnel wall. 
4. What is the buffet boundary of an aircraft? 
5. What is a Mach Number, a critical Mach Number, and a machmeter? 
6. How does the appearance of a shock wave on a wing affect the pressure 
distribution over the wing? 
For solutions see Appendix 5. 
341 
FLIGHT AT TRANSONIC SPEEDS 
Introduction 
As explained in the previous chapter subsonic, transonic and supersonic flight 
merge one into the other, and it is not easy to define where one ends and the 
other begins. But the change from subsonic to transonic does at least involve 
some outward and visible signs -- in the laboratory there is the formation of 
shock waves, and in flight there is the shock stall with its varying effects 
according to the type of aircraft -- whereas the change from transonic to super- 
sonic is not accompanied by any such signs whether in the laboratory or the 
air, so the dividing line between the two is even more vague. In general we can 
only say that supersonic flight begins when the flow over all parts of the aero- 
plane becomes supersonic. But at what Mach Number does that happen? Does 
it in fact ever happen? Are there not always likely to be one or two stagnation 
points? And what about the boundary layer where the flow near the surface is 
certainly subsonic? Perhaps after all it is better to say at about M1.2, or 1.5, 
or maybe 2? Figure 12A (overleaf) illustrates an aircraft designed for super- 
sonic speeds. 
Supersonic shock pattern 
We have already had a look at the supersonic shock pattern in Fig. 11.12e, and 
except that the angles of shock waves become rather more acute as the speed 
increases there is very little change in this pattern over the supersonic range of 
speeds. To see why the angles of the shock waves change, we must understand 
the meaning and significance of the Mach Angle. 
Flight at supersonic 
speeds 
CHAPTER12 
Mach angle 
Figure 11.2 illustrated the piling up of the air in front of a body moving at the 
speed of sound, and explained how the incipient shock wave is formed. This 
incipient shock wave is at right angles to the direction of the airflow, and this 
means as near as matters at right angles to the surface of a body such as a 
wing. 
Now suppose a point is moving at a velocity V (which is greater than the 
speed of sound) in the direction A to D (Fig. 12.1). A pressure wave sent out 
when the point is at A will travel outwards in all directions at the speed of 
sound; but the point will move faster than this, and by the time it has reached 
D, the wave from A and other pressure waves sent out when it was at B and 
C will have formed circles as shown in the figure, and it will be possible to 
draw a common tangent DE to these circles -- this tangent represents the limit 
to which all these pressure waves will have got when the point has reached D. 
Now AE, the radius of the first circle, represents the distance that sound has 
travelled while the point has travelled from A to D, or, expressing it in veloc- 
ities, AE represents the velocity of sound -- usually denoted by a -- and AD 
represents the velocity of the point V. 
So the Mach Number M 
(as illustrated in the figure this is about 2.5). 
The angle ADE, or a, is called the Mach Angle and by simple trigonometry 
it will be clear that 
sina  
in other words, the greater the Mach Number the more acute the angle a. At 
a Mach Number of 1, a of course is 90°. 
1 
M 
a 
V 
V 
a 
Speed of point 
Speed of sound 
343 
FLIGHT AT SUPERSONIC SPEEDS 
a 
A 
B 
C 
D 
E 
Direction 
of flight 
90° 
Velocity of 
sound, a 
Velocity of aircraft, V 
Fig 12.1 Mach angle 
344 MECHANICS OF FLIGHT 
If the moving point is a solid 3-dimensional body, such as a bullet, a com- 
plete cone -- called the Mach Cone -- will be formed, the angle at the apex 
being 2a. If the moving point represents a straight line such as the leading edge 
of a wing, a wedge will be formed, again with an angle 2a at the leading edge. 
The tangent line DE is called a Mach Line, and it clearly represents the 
angle at which small wavelets are formed; the velocity of the airflow can even 
be calculated by measuring the angle on photographs of the wavelets. 
Again the hydraulic analogy may be useful, since similar effects are seen 
when a ship passes through water or a thin stick is placed in a fast-moving 
stream of water. Only the region within the wedge formed by the bow waves 
is affected by the stick; the water outside this region flows on as if nothing was 
there. And the faster the flow, the sharper is the angle of the wedge. 
It might be thought that the Mach Line represented the inclination of the 
shock waves -- but this is not so. Disturbances of small amplitude travel at the 
speed of sound, but shock waves, which are waves of larger amplitude, actu- 
ally travel slightly faster than sound, and therefore they form at a rather larger 
angle to the surface. This fact is difficult to explain without going into the 
mathematics of fluid flow, which is quite beyond the scope of this book, but 
the following explanation of how shock waves are formed may help us to 
understand how their slope is determined. 
Imagine a supersonic flow of air over a flat surface. This surface can never 
be perfectly smooth, and may be considered as consisting of a very large 
number of particles or slight bumps. At each of these bumps a Mach Line will 
be formed; its angle to the surface depending on the speed of the flow in accor- 
dance with the formula sin a 1/M. 
If the speed of flow remains constant, the Mach Lines will all be parallel as 
in Fig. 12.2a (overleaf). 
If the speed of flow is accelerating, the Mach Lines will diverge as the angle 
becomes more acute with the increasing speed (Fig. 12.2b). 
But if the speed of flow is decelerating the Mach Lines will converge, add 
up as it were, and form a more intense disturbance or wave, one of greater 
amplitude (Fig. 12.2c). 
This is one way of explaining how a shock wave is formed at all, but it also 
gives some indication of how its slope is determined. Unfortunately it is not 
very convincing from this point of view, and it could even be argued that the 
slope of the shock wave is less steep than some of the Mach Lines. Also, is a 
shock wave formed because the air is slowing up, or is it the shock wave that 
slows up the flow? 
345 
FLIGHT AT SUPERSONIC SPEEDS 
Fig 12A Flight at supersonic speed (opposite) 
(By courtesy of the Lockheed-California Company, USA) 
The SR-71 Blackbird was capable of flight at Mach numbers in excess of 3. 
Delta wings with high leading-edge sweep, lifting chines on the forward 
fuselage, and two turbo-ramjet engines: bypass turbojets that effectively 
function as ramjets in high-speed flight. 
So perhaps we must fall back on the argument that shock waves travel 
faster than sound, and even more on the fact that the shock wave is at a 
steeper angle than the Mach Lines, for very fortunately that it is a fact can 
easily be seen on photographs; e.g. in Fig. 11B it is clear that the bow and tail 
main shock waves are at a coarser angle than the small wavelets which result 
from small pressure disturbances due to the surface roughness. 
Other examples of the practical effect of large disturbances travelling faster 
than the speed of sound are the hearing of sonic bangs before the noise of the 
aircraft, and the way in which the shock wave of an explosion is followed by 
the other noises. 
But has all this got any practical significance in aircraft design? Yes, as a 
matter of fact, it has; but to understand what the practical significance is we 
must study the nature of supersonic flow. 
Supersonic flow 
There are fundamental differences between supersonic flow and subsonic flow, 
and perhaps these differences are best illustrated by the different ways in 
which the two kinds of flow turn corners, or -- what comes to much the same 
thing -- pass through contracting or expanding ducts. 
Although we may not have put it in that way we have already studied this in 
the case of subsonic flow; and perhaps we may sum up the results by saying -- 
1. That subsonic flow anticipates the corner or whatever it may be, and so 
the pattern of the flow changes before the corner is reached. 
2. That the change of flow takes place gradually on curved paths. 
346 MECHANICS OF FLIGHT 
Shock wave 
(a)( 
b)( 
c) 
Fig 12.2 Mach lines and shock wave 
(a) Speed of flow constant. 
(b) Accelerating flow. 
(c) Decelerating flow. 
3. That at what we might call a concave corner, or in a contracting duct, the 
flow speeds up and the pressure falls. 
4. That at what we might call a convex corner, or in an expanding duct, the 
flow slows down and the pressure rises. 
There are of course complications (as, for instance, if we overdo the sudden- 
ness of the change and the flow breaks away from the surface), but in the main 
we have established these four principles, and have seen numerous examples 
of how they are applied in practice. 
Now let us look at supersonic flow. 
We have already made it sufficiently clear that the first principle is different 
-- and we have explained why it is different. Supersonic flow does not, and 
cannot, anticipate a corner or anything else that lies ahead, because there is no 
means by which it can know that it is there. 
What, then, of the other three principles? 
Compressive flow 
Let us consider first what happens when supersonic flow meets what we have 
called a concave corner, or putting it more practically, a sharp, small-angled 
wedge. One way of describing this kind of corner is to say that if the flow were 
to go straight on it would intersect the body (Fig. 12.3). 
Figure 12.4 (overleaf) shows what happens. The flow will in fact go straight 
on until it hits something -- but what it hits will not be the wedge itself, but the 
shock wave which is formed by the slowing up of the flow as a result of the 
point of the wedge being inserted in the flow, and the consequent converging 
of the Mach Lines (perhaps that wasn't such a bad explanation after all). 
In this type of flow there will be an inclined or oblique shock wave. Now it 
has already been explained that a shock wave at right angles to the flow causes 
a sudden reduction in the speed of flow, but a shock wave oblique to the flow 
causes both a reduction in the magnitude of the velocity, and a change in its 
direction. The change of direction is a result of the fact that it is only the com- 
ponent of the velocity at right angles to the shock wave which is reduced; the 
347 
FLIGHT AT SUPERSONIC SPEEDS 
Airflow 
Flow would 
intersect 
body 
Fig 12.3 Compressive flow -- concave corner 
other component (along the shock wave) remains unchanged in passing 
through the shock wave. This is illustrated in Fig. 12.5, and it is clear that the 
new direction of flow will be parallel to the new surface. 
So the flow has turned the corner; the change of direction was sudden and 
occurred entirely at the shock wave. The flow after the corner is at a reduced 
velocity (though it may still be supersonic), the lines of flow are closer together, 
the pressure is higher, the density is higher (the air is compressed, possibly 
quite appreciably), and the temperature is higher. The Mach Lines, at the 
lower speed, will be more steeply inclined to the new surface. 
Supersonic flow most commonly compresses through a shock wave; and at 
the leading edge of a wing, or the nose of a body, or at the mouth of a con- 
tracting duct, there is -- as at this wedge -- no gradual change of pressure as 
with subsonic flow, but a sudden rise in pressure, density, and temperature, 
and a sudden fall in velocity. This type of flow is called compressive flow. By 
very careful design it is possible to obtain a gradual compression by avoiding 
the conditions where the Mach Lines coalesce (Fig. 12.2(c)). The shock com- 
pression is, though, much more usual. 
Expansive flow 
There is, however, another way in which a supersonic flow can turn corners. 
To understand this let us consider what happens at a convex corner, i.e. one 
at which, if the flow were to go straight on, it would get farther away from the 
surface (Fig. 12.6). 
Figure 12.7 shows the result, though it must be admitted that it doesn't 
really indicate the reason for what happens -- this unfortunately can only be 
given in a mathematical treatment of the subject. 
348 MECHANICS OF FLIGHT 
Greater 
pressure, 
density 
and temperature 
Lower velocity 
Shockwave 
Flow changes direction 
Supersonic 
flow 
Fig 12.4 Compressive flow 
349 
FLIGHT AT SUPERSONIC SPEEDS 
Supersonic 
flow 
Shock wave 
This component 
is unchanged 
This component is reduced 
by shock wave 
New direction and speed 
Old direction and speed of flow 
Fig 12.5 Change of direction and speed of flow 
Airflow 
Airflow would leave body 
Fig 12.6 Expansive flow -- convex corner 
Old 
Mach Line 
New 
Mach Line 
Supersonic 
flow 
Lower 
pressure, 
density 
and temperature 
Higher velocity 
Fig 12.7 Expansive flow 
As we can see from the figures the supersonic airflow, on meeting a corner 
of this type, is free to expand; this it does, becoming more rarefied, i.e. 
decreasing in density in the decreased pressure, and the lines of flow are there- 
fore farther apart, and the temperature also falls as is usual in an expanding 
flow. The speed on the other hand increases. 
So far it seems very similar to compressive flow -- except that all the oppo- 
sites happen! There is, however, another fundamental difference which is 
illustrated on the figure though it may not be immediately obvious. The dotted 
lines indicate the slopes of the two Mach Lines, the first one for the velocity of 
flow before the corner, the second one after the corner; notice that the second 
one is at a more acute angle to the new surface than the first one is to the orig- 
inal surface, i.e. that the angle between the Mach Lines is greater than the 
change of angle of the surface -- this of course is because the velocity after the 
corner is greater than before the corner. But more important than this is to 
notice that between the Mach Lines the flow changes gradually on a curved 
path, not suddenly as at a shock wave, because the Mach Lines no longer con- 
verge as in Fig. 12.2c, but, on the contrary, they now diverge. 
This gradual change of flow helps to emphasise the fact that the Mach Lines 
are nothing like shock waves; for there is some danger that even the dotted 
lines in the figures may suggest that they are. If we go back to the original 
explanation of Mach Lines, it will be realised that, in comparison with shock 
waves, they are small weak waves that may appear anywhere along the 
surface, not just at corners, and that the flow passes through them without 
sudden changes in its direction or physical properties. 
This type of flow is called expansive flow, and the phenomenon at the 
corner which causes the flow to change is sometimes called an expansion 
wave. 
It should be noted that although the change at an expansion wave is 
gradual when compared with that at a shock wave, it still takes place over a 
very short time and distance compared with subsonic flow in which things 
happen long before -- and long after -- the corner is reached. 
It should be noted, too, that although there is a limit to the angle through 
which supersonic flow can be turned at one expansion wave, it is possible to 
turn it through a large angle by a succession of expansion waves. In fact, of 
course a curved surface is an infinite series of corners, and over a convex 
curved surface there will be a succession of expansion waves, and the changes 
in direction of the flow, and in pressure, density, and temperature will be even 
more gradual, though still, unlike subsonic flow, being confined to the passage 
over the surface itself, and not before or after. So, although supersonic flow 
can turn sharp corners, it should not be thought that it cannot also be per- 
suaded to pass over curved surfaces, and this is a very good thing because even 
supersonic aeroplanes sometimes have to fly slowly and curved surfaces are 
very much better for low speeds. 
350 MECHANICS OF FLIGHT 
Supersonic flow over an aerofoil 
We are now in a position to look at the supersonic flow over an aerofoil -- but 
what is to be the shape of our supersonic aerofoil? 
Since straight lines and sharp corners seem to be at least as good as curves, 
the simplest aerofoil section for supersonic speeds would seem to be a flat plate 
inclined at a small angle of attack, and there is no doubt that if it were poss- 
ible to give adequate strength to such a plate it would be the obvious answer. 
If the plate were thin enough the flow would be undisturbed at zero angle 
of attack -- and of course there would be no lift. At a small angle, on the top 
surface there would be an expansion wave at the leading edge and a shock 
wave at the trailing edge, and on the bottom surface a shock wave at the 
leading edge and an expansion wave at the trailing edge, the flow being as in 
Fig. 12.8. 
On the top surface, owing to the expansion wave at the leading edge, the 
flow would be speeded up and there would be a decreased pressure; on the 
bottom surface, owing to the shock wave at the leading edge, the flow would 
be slowed down, and there would be an increased pressure. So there would be 
lift -- and drag. 
But a flat plate is clearly not a practical proposition, so let us have a look 
at a shape that is -- the double-wedge. 
First let us see what happens at zero angle of attack (Fig. 12.9, overleaf). 
The pattern of shock waves and expansions will, of course, be the same on 
both top and bottom surfaces. At the nose (which corresponds exactly to the 
small-angled wedge of Fig. 12.4) there will be shock waves, and the conse- 
quent increases in pressure, density, and temperature, and a decrease in 
351 
FLIGHT AT SUPERSONIC SPEEDS 
Compr ession 
Compression 
Expansion 
Expa nsion 
Supersonic 
flow 
Old 
Mach Line 
New 
Mach Line 
Old 
Mach Line 
New 
Mach Line 
Shock 
wave 
Shock 
wave 
Fig 12.8 Supersonic flow over flat plate at small angle of attack 
velocity; at the point of maximum camber there will be the expansions, and 
the corresponding changes over the rear portion of the aerofoil; at the trailing 
edge, though not perhaps quite so obvious, there will again be the wedge 
effect, shock waves on both surfaces, and again the changes of pressure, 
density, temperature, and velocity. 
At very small angles of attack, for reasons that should now be quite clear, 
the bow shock wave on the upper surface becomes less intense and that on the 
lower surface more intense; the tail shock wave, on the other hand, becomes 
more intense on the upper surface and less intense on the lower surface. But 
one of the most interesting, and perhaps surprising, features of the flow is that 
there is no upwash in front of the aerofoil (how can there be when the airflow 
doesn't know that the aerofoil is coming?) -- and no downwash behind the 
aerofoil; the deflection of the air is only between the shock waves. The 
pressure distribution over the aerofoil accounts for both lift and drag -- as it 
did with the flat plate, which also caused neither upwash nor downwash. After 
all, a speedboat travelling through the water causes a considerable depression 
(and rising) of the water as it passes, but it does not leave a permanent dent! 
When the angle of attack reaches that at which the front portion of the top 
surface is parallel to the approaching airflow (an important condition because 
it gives the maximum lift/drag ratio for this type of aerofoil) the bow shock 
wave on the upper surface, and the tail shock wave on the lower surface, both 
disappear -- as one would expect (Fig. 12.10). 
At a still larger angle -- but the reader may like to draw this for himself. 
Eventually, as the angle of attack is increased, the bow wave will become 
detached, as it always is in front of a blunt nose. 
The reader should have no difficulty in sketching the flow patterns for other 
shapes (such as those in Figs 12.20, 12.21, and 12.22), and at various angles. 
352 MECHANICS OF FLIGHT 
Expansion 
Compression 
Expansion 
Compression 
Supersonic 
flow 
Old 
Mach 
Line 
New 
Mach Line 
Shock 
wave 
Shock 
wave 
Old 
Mach 
Line 
New 
Mach 
Line 
Shock 
wave 
Compression 
Compression 
Shock 
wave 
Fig 12.9 Supersonic flow over double-wedge at zero angle of attack 
Convergent--divergent nozzle 
Let us now consider the flow through a contracting-expanding duct, a conver- 
gent-divergent nozzle, a de Laval nozzle -- at any rate a constriction in a duct; 
or, as we called it in the low speed case, a venturi meter. 
It is true that there are variations in the shapes of these devices according 
to what they are required to do, and according to the speed of flow with which 
they have to deal, but all have this in common -- that they converge from the 
inlet to a throat, then diverge to the outlet. 
We are familiar by now with the picture which illustrates subsonic flow 
through a venturi tube (Fig. 2.6); in the contracting portion the streamlines 
converge, the airflow accelerates, the pressure falls and, although the change 
in density is small (so small that we could then afford to neglect it), it is a 
decrease, i.e. the air is rarefied. In the expanding duct, beyond the throat, the 
streamlines diverge, the airflow decelerates, the pressure rises, and such small 
change in density as may occur is an increase, i.e. the air is compressed. 
What happens if we gradually speed up the flow through the venturi tube? 
The reader can probably answer that from what we have discovered first 
about transonic flow, then about supersonic flow. 
The first thing that will happen is that when the airflow, at the throat, 
reaches the speed of sound, a shock wave will be formed just beyond the 
throat just as it was on the camber of an aerofoil; so instead of the gradual rise 
in pressure and fall in speed beyond the throat, there will be a sudden rise in 
pressure, a sudden fall in speed, and the flow behind the shock wave will 
353 
FLIGHT AT SUPERSONIC SPEEDS 
Expa nsion 
Compression 
Supersonic 
flow 
Old 
Mach 
Line 
New 
Mach Line 
Shock 
wave 
Shock 
wave 
Old 
Mach 
Line 
New 
Mach 
Line 
Straight 
horizontal 
flow 
Straight 
horizontal 
flow 
Compr ession 
Expansion 
Fig 12.10 Supersonic flow over double wedge at angle giving 
maximum L/D 
become turbulent (Fig. 12.11). The front portion of the venturi will still func- 
tion reasonably like a venturi, i.e. the velocity will increase and the pressure 
fall, but the rear portion will no longer serve its proper purpose. 
It is interesting to note that if the upstream flow is subsonic then at the throat the 
speed can never be greater than the speed of sound. If the flow does reach this speed 
it may then accelerate to supersonic speed downstream of the throat (Fig. 12.11). 
In this condition the duct is said to be choked. If the downstream pressure is reduced 
the supersonic region extends and the shock moves out of the divergent section. 
If the flow in the duct ahead of the contraction is supersonic, we find that 
the flow behaves in the opposite way! This time the speed reduces in the con- 
vergent section and increases in the divergent section, reaching a minimum 
value at the throat (Fig. 12.12). The increase in speed is still, however, accom- 
panied by a decrease in pressure and vice versa. 
Expanding--contracting duct 
The fact that a venturi tube has an effect at supersonic speeds opposite to that at 
subsonic speeds leads one to wonder whether we could not get the venturi effect 
at supersonic speeds by having a duct shaped the opposite to that of a venturi tube, 
i.e. by first expanding and then contracting -- and the answer, of course, is yes. 
Figure 12.13 shows supersonic flow through an expanding-contracting duct. 
354 MECHANICS OF FLIGHT 
Subsonic 
Supersonic 
Throat 
Subsonic and 
turbulent flow 
shock wave 
airflow 
Fig 12.11 Incipient shock wave in a venturi tube 
Super- 
sonic 
flow 
Decelerating 
Accelerating 
Fig 12.12 Contracting-expanding duct -- supersonic upstream flow 
The purpose of ramjets and jet engines is to provide the thrust to propel the aero- 
plane or missile, and it can only do this if the velocity of outflow from the engine is 
greater than the velocity of the aeroplane or missile through the air. The air enters 
the ramjet or turbojet at the inlet where it arrives with the velocity of the aeroplane; 
if this is above the speed of sound we can by a clever arrangement of a centre body 
in the inlet (Fig. 12.14) cause shock waves to be formed here and so put up the 
pressure which, in the case of the turbojet, is further increased by the compressor 
itself. The air then speeds up in the expanding duct, and the burning of the fuel adds 
still further to its energy. When the gases leave the jet pipe a system of shocks and 
expansion wave will form in the emerging jet if the pressure is not matched to that 
of the atmosphere at exit, resulting in losses and consequent inefficiency. 
355 
FLIGHT AT SUPERSONIC SPEEDS 
Accelerating 
Decelerating 
Supersonic flow 
Fig 12.13 Supersonic flow through an expanding-contracting duct 
Bo 
w wave
Outer casing 
Reflected 
waves 
Centre body 
Fig 12.14 Centre body at the inlet of a ramjet or turbine 
Since the angle of the bow wave will depend on the Mach Number, the 
centre body must be movable to be fully effective. 
But we are not yet beaten. If we now add a divergent nozzle to the con- 
tracting duct (Fig. 12.15) we get at the throat an expansion wave which is 
reasonably gradual and, after it, a decrease of pressure more gradually to 
atmospheric, together with an increase of velocity -- which is just what we 
wanted. It is in this form that the convergent-divergent nozzle is sometimes 
referred to as a de Laval nozzle after the famous turbine engineer of that name. 
Subsonic and supersonic flow -- a summary 
Now, I think, we are in a position to sum up the essential differences between 
subsonic and supersonic flow in contracting and expanding ducts, and in 
similar circumstances such as over aerofoils or other bodies. 
In a Contracting Duct In an Expanding Duct 
Flow accelerates 
Flow decelerates 
Subsonic Flow 
Air rarefies slightly 
Air is compressed slightly 
Pressure falls 
Pressure rises 
Flow decelerates 
Flow accelerates 
Supersonic Flow Air is compressed 
Air is rarefied 
Pressure rises 
Pressure falls 
In short, everything in supersonic flow is exactly the opposite to subsonic flow 
with one important exception -- in both cases increasing speed goes with 
decreasing pressure. So Bernoulli's principle, which at low speeds is really the 
conservation of energy, has still some significance (though modifications are 
needed before it can be applied quantitatively in compressible flow). 
Notice, too, that what happens in supersonic flow is what we said in an 
earlier chapter was what common sense might lead us to expect -- a decrease 
of speed and compression at the throat of a venturi. It is some measure of our 
learning and understanding of the subject if by now this is no longer common 
sense! 
356 MECHANICS OF FLIGHT 
Fig 12.15 A de Laval nozzle 
Boundary layer and supersonic flow 
It may be noticed that in all this we have said little or nothing about the 
boundary layer, and it was the boundary layer that caused all the trouble in 
subsonic flow when it came to corners, and it was the boundary layer that was 
so important in transonic flow when the incipient shock wave was formed, 
and for which we had to think of such devices as vortex generators. 
The truth is that the boundary layer is relatively unimportant in supersonic 
flow; it is thin and the viscous forces within it are relatively small. This largely 
accounts for the ability of supersonic flow to turn sharp corners. 
Curiously enough, at the even higher speeds which will be mentioned later 
in this chapter, the boundary layer thickens again, and once more becomes sig- 
nificant. So the supersonic region is especially privileged in this respect, and in 
many respects the theory of the flow is simpler than over any other range of 
speeds. 
Supersonic wing shapes -- plan form 
In flight at subsonic speeds the shape of the aerofoil section is in some respects 
more important than the plan form of the wing, but at supersonic speeds it is 
the plan form which is the more important (Fig. 12B, overleaf). On the other 
hand, the more one studies the seemingly endless variety of both aerofoil 
section and plan form that are not only possible but seem to have proved suc- 
cessful in supersonic flight, the more one is forced to the conclusion that 
neither shape matters very much; supersonic flow is more accommodating 
than subsonic flow, less fussy in what it encounters, and although, compared 
with subsonic flow, the lift coefficient is less, the drag coefficient greater, and 
the L/D ratio in consequence lower, the actual values of CL, CD, and L/D, and 
the position of the centre of pressure seem to be little affected by the shapes of 
either the cross-section or the plan form of the wing. 
Let us consider first the plan form. It will be remembered that in the tran- 
sonic region there was advantage in a considerable degree of sweepback of the 
leading edge because it delayed the shock stall, the increase of drag, buffeting, 
and so on -- in other words, it raised the critical Mach Number. It is often 
stated that there is no advantage in sweepback after the critical Mach Number 
has been passed, and that straight wings are better for supersonic flight. This 
might be true if the only effect of sweepback was to delay the critical Mach 
Number -- but actually it does more than this. 
Consider, for instance, the plan shapes A, B, C, and D (Fig. 12.16, overleaf); 
with the possible exception of B, all these have been used on high-speed air- 
craft. At the apex of each are shown the Mach Lines for a Mach Number of 
about 1.8, and it will be noticed that the leading edges for these shapes all lie 
357 
FLIGHT AT SUPERSONIC SPEEDS 
within the Mach Cone, and this in turn means that the airflow which strikes 
the wing has been affected by the wing before it reaches it; if, as is probable, 
there are also shock waves at the nose of the aeroplane, or at the apex of the 
wing, the whole of the leading edge of the wing will be behind these shock 
waves and so will encounter an airflow of speed lower than that of the aero- 
plane. This airflow may not be actually subsonic, but at least the resolved part 
of it at right angles to the leading edge, or across the chord, is likely to be. So 
although a swept-back wing is better than an unswept wing in the transonic 
region, it may retain some of its advantages even into the supersonic region -- 
and this applies particularly to thick wings which are naturally more prone to 
the formation of shock waves. 
Of course, if we are to keep within the Mach Cone the sweepback must 
increase with the Mach Number, until eventually the delta shape may be more 
appropriately described as an arrow-head shape (Fig. 12.17). 
358 MECHANICS OF FLIGHT 
ABC D 
Fig 12.16 Supersonic wings -- plan shapes 
Fig 12B Supersonic configuration (opposite) 
(By courtesy of British Aerospace Defence Ltd, Military Aircraft Division.) 
The Typhoon Eurofighter prototype with delta wing and canard foreplane 
for control. 
Mach Lines 
Fig 12.17 Arrow-head delta wing for high Mach Numbers 
359 
FLIGHT AT SUPERSONIC SPEEDS 
But whenever we discuss the advantages of sweepback we must never forget 
its disadvantages which are largely structural; the twisting and bending 
stresses on a heavily swept-back wing give many headaches to the designer and 
mean extra weight to provide the strength. But there is also the old bogey of 
tip stalling and lateral control near the stalling -- and landing -- speed. Shapes 
A and B are better structurally than C and D, they are better, too, from the 
point of view of tip stalling; they also have an interesting, though perhaps 
rather concealed, advantage in that owing to the long chord the wing can be 
thick (which means a good ratio of strength to weight), yet still slim as regards 
thickness/chord ratio (which is what matters as regards shock drag). Have C 
and D then no advantages? -- it would be strange if they hadn't, because they 
are in fact more common in practical aeroplanes than B, until recently than A 
also, but A is becoming increasingly popular in modern designs for supersonic 
transport. The advantage of C and D lies chiefly in lower drag (in spite of the 
point mentioned above), and so in better lift/drag ratio; they are also more 
suitable for the conventional fuselage and control system (if that is an advan- 
tage), and for engine installation. 
One rather unexpected bonus resulting from the use of delta wings, or 
others with extreme taper and sweepback of more than 55° or so, comes from 
the stall itself; this is a leading edge stall which starts at the wing tip and pro- 
gresses gradually inboard, the separation bubble is then swept back with the 
leading edge and shed as a trailing vortex, tightly rolled up and with a very 
low pressure at its core. The low pressure acts on the forward facing parts of 
the upper surface of the wing giving a 'form thrust' (in effect a negative drag) 
and a lift boost; moreover the flow in the core is stable and causes little buf- 
feting, unlike the separation vortex on wings with sweepback of less than 50°. 
This is, in fact, an effective way of producing lift. Concorde used it at both 
subsonic and supersonic speeds. The use of fences, saw teeth and vortex gen- 
erators can, at best, only give partial mitigation of the resulting stalling 
phenomena such as the buffeting, wing drop and pitch up. 
But whatever the pros and cons of sweepback there is no doubt that there 
is a lot to be said for the straight rectangular wing for really high supersonic 
speeds (Fig. 12.18). With the small aspect ratio, and tremendously high wing 
loading associated with such speeds, the wings are very small anyway, and 
from the strength point of view a rectangular wing, or a wing that is tapered 
for structural reasons rather than for aerodynamic reasons, will probably win 
the day. 
Figure 12.19 shows how only small portions of a rectangular wing at super- 
sonic speeds (the shaded areas) can know of the existence of the tips, and these 
portions will tend to exhibit the normal characteristics of 3-dimensional subsonic 
flow, wing-tip vortices, etc., while the flow over the remainder of the wing will be 
straight 2-dimensional flow as if the wing was of infinite span and there were no 
wing tips. This leads to a rather obvious suggestion -- cut off the shaded portions. 
This, in fact, is sometimes evident in design, but the arguments one way and 
another, for sweep at leading or trailing edge (or both, or neither), for delta 
360 MECHANICS OF FLIGHT 
and arrow plan forms, for tail first or wing first, for tail to be larger or smaller 
than the wing, even to decide which is the wing and which the tail -- that these 
arguments are endless is clearly evident from the numerous shapes and con- 
figurations which have been tried or suggested for missiles or supersonic 
aeroplanes. 
The fundamental difficulty, for aircraft rather than missiles, is to provide 
wings that are suitable not only for supersonic flight, but also for subsonic and 
transonic flight. After all, supersonic aeroplanes have to take off and land; and 
they also have to pass through the transonic region. The real answer -- so far 
as plan form is concerned -- is surely in variable sweep (Fig. 12.20, overleaf); 
advocated many years ago by an eminent British inventor but, as so often 
361 
FLIGHT AT SUPERSONIC SPEEDS 
1.0 
1.2 
1.4 
1.6 
1.8 
2.0 
2.2 
M 
Fig 12.18 Wing shapes and drag 
How the drag increases with Mach Number for straight, highly-swept and 
delta wing shapes. 
Direction 
of flight 
Mach 
angle 
Fig 12.19 Rectangular wing at high Mach Numbers 
happens, left to others to put into practice; the Americans had serious teething 
troubles with their first real effort in this direction, the General Dynamics 
swing-wing F--111, of which so much was expected. Perhaps as a result of this 
disappointment, the Boeing idea of a swing-wing supersonic transport was 
also abandoned. Nor, in the meantime, were the French initially successful 
with their Mirage G (Fig. 12C, overleaf), but accumulated experience pays off 
and the variable sweep concept has been adopted for a number of aircraft 
including the Tornado. 
The design process is finely balanced though; a great number of solutions 
to the problem of supersonic flight abound, such as the simple long-nosed 
delta configuration of the Anglo-French Concorde (Fig. 12D, overleaf). 
Supersonic wing shapes -- aerofoil sections 
What then of the shape of the aerofoil section? 
The proviso here is that it must be thin -- or to be more correct, that it must 
have a low thickness/chord ratio -- but apart from this it doesn't seem to matter 
very much. Straight lines are as good as, or better than curved surfaces; and 
there is no objection to corners, even sharp corners -- within reason. 
A flat plate would make an excellent supersonic wing section, but would 
not have the necessary stiffness or strength; and the easiest way to make it a 
practical proposition is to thicken it somewhere in the middle, and thickness 
in the middle leads naturally to the double-wedge, or rhombus shape, which 
we have already discussed (Fig. 12.9), and which is as good as any other super- 
sonic aerofoil section. 
It makes little difference whether the thickest point is half-way back, or 
more or less; there is little change of drag for x/c ratios between 40 per cent 
and 60 per cent (Fig. 12.21), and the lift and centre of pressure positions are 
362 MECHANICS OF FLIGHT 
Fig 12.20 Variable sweep 
not affected at all. But we have always got to consider flight at subsonic speeds 
and, from this point of view, maximum thickness should be at 40 per cent of 
the chord rather than farther back; from this point of view, too, it may pay to 
round the corners slightly. 
A variation of the double-wedge is the hexagonal shape (Fig. 12.22). This 
gives greater depth along the chord and so greater strength, and also makes 
the leading edge rather less sharp, which has advantages both as regards 
strength and, as will be considered later, aerodynamic heating. 
A bi-convex wing is also quite good (Fig. 12.23), and this is better than the 
others at subsonic speeds. A bi-convex wing has about the same drag as a 
double-wedge with maximum thickness rather outside the best range, i.e. at 
about 25 or 75 per cent of the chord. 
Enough has been said about supersonic aerofoil sections to make it clear 
why the sections in Appendix 1 are all of subsonic type; there would not be 
much point in giving the contour of a flat plate, or even of a double-wedge -- 
and moreover there is little difference between the lift and drag coefficients of 
all reasonable shapes, and still less difference in the positions of centre of 
pressure. 
Theory predicts a maximum value of L/D of 12.5 for a wing with a thick- 
ness/chord ratio of 4 per cent at a Mach Number above about 1.3. (Note that 
363 
FLIGHT AT SUPERSONIC SPEEDS 
t 
t 
t 
x 
x 
x 
L.E. 
L.E. 
L.E. 
=50% =10% 
x 
c 
tc 
=40% =10% 
x 
c 
tc 
=60% =10% 
x 
c 
tc 
Fig 12.21 x/c ratio 
L.E. 
t 
t 
= 10% 
tc 
Fig 12.22 Hexagonal wing section 
L.E. 
t 
= 10% 
tc 
Fig 12.23 Bi-convex wing section 
364 MECHANICS OF FLIGHT 
Fig 12C Variable sweep 
(By courtesy of Avions Marcel Dassault, France) 
The Mirage G, with wings folded and 70° sweepback, wings extended and 
20° sweepback; maximum speed in level flight Mach 2.5, landing speed 
110 knots; no ailerons, lateral control (wings back) by differential action of 
slab tail plane supplemented when wings are spread by spoilers on wings. 
Fig 12D Concorde (opposite) 
(By courtesy of the British Aircraft Corporation) 
365 
FLIGHT AT SUPERSONIC SPEEDS 
in this statement there is no reference to the shape of the wing, or where is the 
greatest thickness.) This value is inferior to L/D ratios for subsonic wing 
shapes (only about half), but it is reasonably economical when everything is 
taken into consideration. The lift coefficient is the same for all the shapes, and 
although it is smaller than those of subsonic aerofoils this does not matter at 
high speeds; where it does matter is that it means high stalling and landing 
speeds, which in turn mean long runways, and devices such as tail parachutes 
to help reduce the speed after landing. A leading-edge flap, or a permanent 
droop at the leading edge (sometimes called a droop-snoot), will appreciably 
lower the landing and stalling speed of a supersonic aerofoil section. As with 
plan shape the only way of making an aerofoil suitable for subsonic, transonic, 
and supersonic flight is to make it variable in shape; but in this case we know 
that it can be done because, in fact, it has long been done -- so the only ques- 
tion is the best way of doing it. 
Figure 12.24 shows the pressure distribution, and position of the centre of 
pressure, for three shapes at a small angle of attack. Comment would be super- 
fluous. 
Supersonic body shapes 
The considerations which decide body shapes for supersonic speeds are similar 
to those which apply to wing sections. Bodies should be slender, but there are 
limits in practice owing to the need for room inside the body, for stowage, etc. 
All in all, the optimum fineness ratio is about 6 to 8 per cent. 
Also for reasons of stowage and body capacity there are advantages in 
curves rather than straight lines, and in a rounded nose and tail (Fig. 12.25a). 
From the drag and speed point of view the nose should be sharp pointed, and 
often is; but there are disadvantages -- the pilot's view is bad (hence the droop- 
366 MECHANICS OF FLIGHT 
Expansion 
Expansion 
Expansion 
Expansion 
Shock 
Shock 
Shock 
Shock 
Shock 
Gradual 
expansion 
Centre of 
pressure 
Centre of 
pressure 
(a) 
(b) 
Shock 
Fig 12.24 Supersonic pressure distributions 
(a) Pattern of shocks and expansions. 
(b) Pressure distribution and centre of pressure. 
snoot as on the Concorde), the sharp point is useless for stowage, and the 
transmission of radar pulses is unsatisfactory. The tail portion can be cut off, 
like the rear of a bullet, without much loss of efficiency; and this is necessary 
in any case when the jet or rocket efflux is at the rear of the body (Fig. 12.25b). 
A body or fuselage of some kind is clearly necessary if the aircraft is to carry 
pilot, passengers, mail, or goods, and if the wings are to be thin -- but are 
wings really necessary at supersonic speeds? Bodies can easily be designed to 
give lift (whatever their shape they will give lift at a small angle of attack), but 
cannot the thrust be used to provide the lift? In earlier chapters we talked of 
flying wing; why not a flying body? 
Well, of course, a rocket can be nothing more nor less than a flying body -- 
and more will be said about rockets in the next chapter -- but even rockets need 
guidance and, within the atmosphere at least, guidance and control are best 
achieved by fixed and movable surfaces. There is also, so far as aeroplanes are 
concerned, the not unimportant point of getting back to earth. 
But the reason for mentioning this problem is something quite different. 
One advantage in having a wing at supersonic speeds is that the presence of 
the wing improves the lift on the body -- there is interference between wing and 
body, but it is useful interference; and it is mutually useful, because the body 
produces an upwash which improves the lift of the wing. 
There are great possibilities in the exploitation of beneficial interference at 
supersonic speeds, and it is something which we may hear a lot more about in 
the future. Another example of it has already been mentioned in connection 
with putting a centre body at the inlet of a ramjet or jet engine. A suggestion 
has even been made of beneficial biplane effects, by eliminating external shock 
bow waves, and using the shock between the wings to good effect as in an 
engine intake -- perhaps making the biplane the engine. Who knows? 
A form of area rule is still effective in reducing shock drag at supersonic 
speeds, but its application is rather more complicated. Since the shock waves 
and Mach Lines are now oblique, instead of being at right angles to the flow, 
the 'area' which must change smoothly is not that at right angles to the line of 
367 
FLIGHT AT SUPERSONIC SPEEDS 
(a) 
(b) 
Parabolic 
Parabolic 
Parabolic 
Parabolic 
Rounded 
L.E. 
Rounded 
T.E. 
Sharp point 
at L.E. 
T.E. cut off 
for jet efflux 
Fig 12.25 Supersonic body shapes 
flight, but in planes parallel to the Mach Lines. And unfortunately the incli- 
nation of the Mach Lines depends on the Mach Number at which the aircraft 
is flying, so the shape of the aircraft can only be correct for a particular Mach 
Number. 
Kinetic heating 
We all know that friction increases temperature, an example of deterioration 
of energy from the highest to the lowest form (from mechanical energy to 
thermal energy), a natural process -- and skin friction in the flow of fluids is no 
exception. We all know, too, that an increase of pressure, as in a pump, raises 
temperature -- and the stagnation pressure on the nose of a body or wing is no 
exception. So when an aeroplane moves through the air it gets hot; some parts 
more than others, some owing to the temperature increase created by skin fric- 
tion, some owing to that created by pressure. 
When, then, do we first come up against this? The answer is -- when we first 
fly! But it isn't serious? No -- like many other things, it isn't serious at low 
speeds. It has been said that aeroplanes made of wax melt at 300 to 400 knots, 
those made of aluminium at 1600 to 1800, those of stainless steel at 2300 to 
2400 knots. Aeroplanes are not made of wax (wind tunnel models sometimes 
have been), but some are made of aluminium alloy, and some of stainless steel, 
and of other metals (such as titanium) and their alloys, and just because of this 
very problem. Nor can we afford to go anywhere near the melting point; 
metals are weakened long before that -- and what about the passengers, and 
crew, and freight? 
Bullets and shells certainly travel at speeds where heating is significant, but 
within limits it doesn't matter whether bullets and shells get hot or not. Also 
their flight is not usually of very long duration, and it takes time for the surface 
to heat up. But meteors and satellites re-enter the atmosphere without any 
means of braking -- and we know what happens to them, they get frizzled up. 
It is true that most manned space-craft have survived re-entry and more will 
be said about that in the next chapter. Let us at least consider what we can do 
to reduce heating effects. 
A very simple formula (V/100)2, where V is the speed in knots, gives a very 
fair approximation to the temperature rise in degrees Celsius. So what is 
merely a rise of 1°C at 100 knots, or 4°C at 200 knots, becomes 36°C at 600, 
100°C at 1000, and 400°C at 2000 knots. That is how we discovered that the 
aeroplane made of wax would melt! Figure 12.26 shows rather more accu- 
rately local surface temperatures that may be reached under certain conditions 
at Mach numbers up to 4; these have been calculated from the formula t/T 
(1 M2/5) where t is the stagnation temperature, i.e. the temperature of air 
moving at a Mach Number of M being brought to rest, and T is the local tem- 
perature of the air; the figures relate to 8500 m where the local temperature is 
368 MECHANICS OF FLIGHT 
 40°C. The temperatures shown in the graph apply to a laminar boundary 
layer; the temperatures are rather higher for a turbulent boundary layer. 
Moreover, at Mach Numbers above 2 these surface temperatures may be 
reached in a matter of seconds, and certainly within a minute or two, unless 
there is some method of insulation. 
Many devices have been tried, and no doubt many more will be tried, in an 
effort to counter this heating problem. These devices may be classified under 
the following headings -- 
(a) To insulate the structure from the heat. 
(b) To use materials which can stand the high temperatures without serious 
loss of strength. 
(c) To encourage radiation from the surfaces and so reduce the temperatures. 
(d) To circulate a cooling fluid below the surface. 
(e) Refrigeration by any of the normal methods. 
As regards materials for the aircraft structure light alloys are suitable for Mach 
Numbers up to 2, or even higher for short periods. Between M2 and M4 
titanium alloy may be the answer, but above 3 or 3.5 stainless steel is probably 
better as being more readily available. 
369 
FLIGHT AT SUPERSONIC SPEEDS 
Temperature, °C
500 
400 
300 
200 
100 
0 
--40 
--100 01234 
M 
595 1190 1785 2380 knots 
Speed 
Fig 12.26 How the surface temperature rises with the Mach Number 
The graph relates to a height of 28 000 ft (8500 m) where the local 
temperature of the surrounding air is  40°C. 
It must be remembered that the crew, the equipment and the fuel must be 
protected as well as the structure itself, so there is no point in using materials 
which will stand the high temperatures, unless there is also refrigeration to 
keep the interior of the aircraft cool. 
Perhaps the most ingenious idea is to apply the heat to a suitable working 
fluid (hydrogen has been suggested), and to eject the expanding fluid through 
a suitable nozzle, and so propel the aircraft! Ingenious and fascinating -- drag 
produces heat, heat produces thrust to help overcome the drag. In principle it 
is not impossible. 
An interesting aspect of surface heating is the effect of shape. It is the speed 
of flow adjacent to the boundary layer which is the deciding factor in the tem- 
perature rise -- and to some extent, of course, the nature and thickness of the 
boundary layer itself -- and the speed of flow depends on the shape of the body. 
But there is more in it than that. A rise in temperature is created owing to skin 
friction, and owing to the stagnation pressure, but it is also created by shock 
waves, and whereas the main effect of skin friction in the boundary layer is to 
raise the temperature of the surface, the main effect of the shock waves is to 
raise the temperature of the air -- and that doesn't matter very much. So from 
the point of view of keeping down surface temperatures it is better to have 
wave drag than boundary layer drag. This conclusion isn't very helpful with 
regard to aircraft in which we try to reduce every kind of drag to a minimum, 
but it is a most important consideration in designing bodies for re-entry to the 
atmosphere from space, bodies in which we want drag, but we don't want 
heating of the surfaces. 
Another influence of the heating problem on shape is in the avoidance of 
sharp edges, which might seem desirable from the flow point of view, but 
which would be particularly susceptible to local temperature rise and conse- 
quent weakening of the material. 
Kinetic heating is already a limiting factor in the speed of certain types of 
aircraft, and it provides a very formidable problem in regard to the re-entry 
into the atmosphere of spacecraft and even of long-range missiles such as will 
be considered in the next chapter. 
Stability and control problems 
In the previous chapter we considered some of the problems of stability and control 
at transonic speeds. Some of these still apply in the supersonic region, and control 
surfaces should be of the all-moving slab type, and fully power-operated. But 
whereas in the transonic range this applied mostly to the tail, in the supersonic 
range it can be applied also in all-moving wing tips to replace conventional 
ailerons, and even to an all-moving fin and rudder. Since the main plane may be 
nearly as small as the tail plane, it, too, may be movable to give pitch; in fact in some 
missiles it is not easy to decide which is the main plane and which the tail plane. 
370 MECHANICS OF FLIGHT 
But there are also new problems at supersonic speeds because the inertia 
forces are so great that it is practically impossible to provide the inherent 
natural stability of the kind that is associated with such devices as dihedral and 
fin area. In order to be effective against the inertia forces the surfaces would 
have to be so large that the cost in weight and drag would be prohibitive -- and 
this applies particularly at great heights where there is so little air density. 
Another difficulty, which is especially applicable to military aircraft, is that 
pilot and crew have so much to do in looking after the equipment that they 
must be relieved as far as possible of flying the aeroplane. 
Of course we have long been familiar with the automatic pilot, but the 
modern conception is very different from this -- nothing more nor less, in fact, 
than synthetic stability and automatic control. Is the pilot then necessary at 
all? Strictly speaking, probably not, the aircraft can be controlled from the 
ground like a guided missile. But pilots can still do some things that instru- 
ments cannot, they can monitor the automatic systems, tell them what to do, 
investigate any failure and, if necessary, take over control. 
Concorde 
It seems fitting to conclude a discussion on the problems of flight, from sub- 
sonic to supersonic, with some comments on the design of the late lamented 
Concorde, because controversy on its cost, on its sonic boom and on its com- 
mercial viability have tended to obscure the cleverness of its design. Readers 
who have followed the arguments put forward in this book will surely be fas- 
cinated by some of its outstanding features. It would possibly be going too far 
to describe one of the main features of such a costly and sophisticated piece of 
equipment as simplicity yet, as we shall see, there is some truth in such a 
description. 
The now familiar ogee (or double curve) plan shape of the wing gives both 
a large chord (27.7 m), with its advantages, and a large span (25.6 m), with 
its advantages. 
The large chord means that although the wing is thin, very thin, from the 
aerodynamic (t/c) point of view (only 3 per cent at the root and 2.15 per cent 
outside the engine nacelles), and so has low wave drag; yet at the same time it 
is deep enough (83 cm) to give the required strength and structural stiffness, 
usually a difficulty with slender swept-back wings. The main advantage of the 
large span is the reduction of vortex, or induced, drag at all speeds. 
The slimness of wings and body (the Boeing 747 Jumbo Jet is longer, higher 
and much fatter than the Concorde), and the limitation of speed to just over 
Mach 2, have kept down the temperature rise and made it possible to use alu- 
minium alloys, with which we have long been familiar, for most parts of the 
structure, instead of having to experiment with the more costly, and heavier, 
stainless steel or titanium alloys. The temperature rise in the structure is also 
371 
FLIGHT AT SUPERSONIC SPEEDS 
reduced by using the fuel as a heat sink. The maximum landing weight is 1068 
kN, and the maximum landing wing loading 4.786 kN/m2, less than that of 
many comparable aircraft. 
The ogee plan shape has another advantage in that the stalling angle is so 
large that it is unlikely to be reached in any ordinary condition of flight; this 
is because the shape leads to the formation of leading edge vortices (without 
any vortex generators!), and so improves the flow in the boundary layer and 
gives smooth changes of lift and pitching moment with angle of attack. 
On the wing there are no flaps, no slots, no tabs, no spoilers, no saw teeth, 
no fences, nor any other devices usually required for such a large speed range 
as from 65.4 m/s (at 18° angle of attack) to a true speed of 649 m/s. The only 
moving surfaces on the wing are the six elevons (combined ailerons and eleva- 
tors) which control both rolling and pitching -- and very effectively too. The 
rudder has two sections, but is otherwise simple and conventional. 
The large 'leading edge' vortices are useful when landing as lift continues to 
increase to large values with increasing angle of attack, the 'lift boost' and the 
'form thrust' already mentioned in connection with highly-swept wings, and 
the large area of the delta wing gives a considerable cushioning effect when 
near the ground (two reasons for dispensing with flaps). 
Perhaps one of the most interesting features, taking us back to one of the 
earliest ideas for adjusting trim is the movement of fuel between tanks, auto- 
matically between the main tanks for adjusting the centre of gravity during 
cruising flight and, under the pilot's control, from forward tanks to a rear tank 
under the fin during acceleration to supersonic flight when the aerodynamic 
centre moves back, and vice versa when returning to subsonic flight. 
Pilots report that it is only by looking at the machmeter that they know 
when Concorde is going supersonic. 
Flight at hypersonic speeds 
In concluding this subject we must not leave an impression that once we have 
conquered the problems of supersonic flight, we have finished. Far from it -- 
no sooner do we learn to get through one region of speeds than another, with 
new problems to solve, opens up before us. 
Rather strangely, too, there does not seem to be much argument about 
where the change takes place in this case -- above a Mach Number of 5 we talk 
of hypersonic speeds instead of supersonic speeds. It doesn't pay to try to see 
the sense of this rather extraordinary use of the English language, or perhaps 
we should say of Latin and Greek, which makes hypersonic superior as 
regards speed to supersonic; nor shall we get very far if we try to discover just 
why the Mach Number of 5 is so significant; actually it is a number of dif- 
ferent factors that decides the issue, and that is far beyond the scope of this 
book. 
372 MECHANICS OF FLIGHT 
To us hypersonic flight is simply supersonic flight -- only more so. Here we 
are deep into kinetic heating effects with all the associated problems; at a 
Mach Number of 5 at about 61 km the temperature given by the formula is 
over 1000°C and by Mach 15 it has risen to over 10 000°C. The actual tem- 
peratures are found to be rather lower, but not so much lower as to give any 
real comfort! 
Mach Lines are inclined at very acute angles; Fig. 12.27 shows the shock 
waves and Mach Lines over a double-wedge section at a Mach Number of 10, 
and Fig. 12.28 is sketched from a photograph of a bullet moving at the same 
Mach Number. These suggest an arrow type of aircraft as being most suitable 
(Fig. 12.29). 
One feature of hypersonic flow is a thickening of the boundary layer and an 
increased importance of the nature of the flow within the boundary layer. 
Aerofoil shape seems to matter even less than in supersonic flight; lift and 
drag coefficients tend towards a constant value as the Mach Number increases. 
An interesting aspect of this part of the subject is the wide variety of exper- 
imental methods used to investigate it -- arc-heated jets, gun tunnels, shock 
tubes, shock tunnels, hot shot tunnels, models moved by rockets or guns, and 
ballistic ranges; names that are all to some extent descriptive of the methods 
373 
FLIGHT AT SUPERSONIC SPEEDS 
Mach 
number = 10 
Shock-wave angle = 8.2° 
Shock-wave angle = 8.2° 
Expansion wave 
Expansion wave 
M=8.8 
M=8.8 
M=11.4 
M=11.4 
Fig 12.27 Hypersonic shock and expansion waves 
Fig 12.28 From a photograph of a bullet moving at Mach 10 
Fig 12.29 Arrow-head: shape of the future? 
employed, each of which would need a chapter to itself. Mach Numbers of 15 
can be achieved in still air on ballistic ranges, and even more if the projectile 
is fired against the airflow in a wind tunnel. 
But even hypersonic flow is not the end; at Mach Numbers of 8 or 9 some- 
thing entirely new begins to happen -- molecules, first of oxygen, then at even 
higher speeds of nitrogen, dissociate, or split into atoms and ions, thus 
changing the very nature of the air and its physical properties (another 
phenomenon that is experienced by space-ships on re-entry into the atmos- 
phere, and which affects radio communication with them). At this stage there 
are possibilities of the control of the flow by electro-magnetic devices. 
And so it goes on. Nothing, so far, suggests an end. Figure 12.30 shows how 
speed records have gone up -- and up -- and up. 
Lifting bodies 
So far as aeroplanes are concerned, the North American X15 was quoted in 
an earlier edition of this book as the nearest approach to a piloted hypersonic 
aircraft -- indeed, if we accept M5 as the threshold of hypersonic flight, it was 
hypersonic for it achieved a speed of 1860 m/s and a height of 95 940 m as 
long ago as 1962 -- this speed corresponds to a Mach Number of over 6. It was 
launched from a mother craft at 13 720 m and 224 m/s; it had a rocket engine 
giving a thrust of 260 kilonewtons, and rocket nozzles for space control, but 
fuel for only 68 seconds at full power. It landed, as an aeroplane, at 134 m/s 
some 320 kilometres from launch. 
The experimental programme with the X15 has now been superseded by a 
similar programme with what are called lifting bodies, with little if anything 
in the way of wings, with powerful control surfaces and, as their name implies, 
with bodies so shaped as to give a certain amount of lift at high speeds. As 
with the X15 these are launched from a mother craft, have rocket power avail- 
able for a very limited period, and this can be used first to attain considerable 
height and then, after a fast and steep descent -- usually without power -- 
towards the earth, a circling approach at some 15 m/s for the last 6000 m or 
so, followed by a steep glide, using speed brakes as required, and finally a 
touch of rocket power to help the round out, and a fast landing at about 
100 m/s. 
These lifting bodies offer some advantages for future shuttle and sub orbital 
vehicles. 
374 MECHANICS OF FLIGHT 
Can you answer these? 
1. What is a Mach Angle? a Mach Cone? a Mach Line? 
2. Do shock waves travel at the speed of sound? If there is a difference, what 
effect does it have? 
3. What is an expansion wave? 
4. Why are sharp leading edges used on supersonic wings? 
5. What influence is the heating problem having on the materials used for 
aircraft construction? 
6. What are the main features of the wing used on the Concorde? 
375 
FLIGHT AT SUPERSONIC SPEEDS 
Speed records, aeroplanes, knots
2000 
1800 
1600 
1400 
1200 
1000 
800 
600 
400 
200 
1900 1910 1920 1930 1940 1950 1960 1970 1980 
Year 
3800 
3600 
3400 
3200 
3000 
2800 
2600 
2400 
2200 
2000 
1800 
1600 
1400 
1200 
1000 
800 
600 
400 
200 
Speed records, aeroplanes, kilometres per hour
Supersonic 
flight 
Kineti 
c heati 
ng
The sound 
barrier 
Transonic 
flight 
Subsonic flight 
Swept and thin wings 
Gas turbines 
Second World War 
Laminar flow wings 
Retractable undercarriages 
Variable pitch propellers 
Return of the monoplane 
Schneider Trophy Races 
Cowling of radial engines 
Metal construction 
Biplanes 
Slots and flaps 
First 
World War 
Fig 12.30 Where do we go from here? 
For solutions see Appendix 5. 
For numerical questions on flight at transonic and supersonic speeds see 
Appendix 3. 
376 MECHANICS OF FLIGHT 
Fig 12E Another supersonic configuration 
The McDonnell Douglas F-18 Hornet which features a wing with only 
moderate rearward sweep on the leading edge, and a small forward 
sweep on the trailing edge. The sharply swept strakes also generate lift, 
and control the flow over the main wing. 
Ballistics and astronautics 
At first glance it may seem that space flight (Fig. 13A, overleaf) is purely con- 
cerned with ballistics and is completely divorced from aerodynamics, but as 
we hinted in Chapter 1 at the speeds and heights of modern flight aeroplanes 
behave to some extent like missiles, and missiles, given the required thrust and 
speed, can actually become satellites. Moreover, both missiles and artificial 
satellites must pass through the earth's atmosphere when they are launched, 
and there experience aerodynamic forces, and -- what is far more important -- 
the most hopeful means of returning them safely to earth again is to use aero- 
dynamic forces to slow them up and control them. 
In short, the subjects of aerodynamics, ballistics, and astronautics have 
merged into one subject, the mechanics of flight, and no apology is needed for 
the inclusion of this chapter in a book on that subject. 
The upper atmosphere 
The atmosphere with which we have been concerned in the flight of aeroplanes 
-- i.e. the troposphere and the stratosphere -- is sometimes called the lower 
atmosphere; the remainder is called the upper atmosphere (Fig. 13.1, overleaf). 
In the lower atmosphere the temperature had dropped from an average of 
 15°C (288 K) at sea-level to  57°C (217 K) at the base of the stratosphere, 
and had then remained more or less constant. The pressure and density of the 
air had both dropped to a mere fraction of their values at sea-level, about 1 
per cent in fact. One might almost be tempted to think that not much more 
could happen, but such an assumption would be very far from the truth. 
There is a lot of atmosphere above 20 km -- several hundred kilometres of it, 
we don't exactly know, it merges so gradually into space that there is really no 
Space flight 
CHAPTER13 
exact limit to it -- but a great deal happens in these hundreds of kilometres. The 
temperature, for instance, behaves in a very strange way; it may have been fairly 
easy to explain its drop in the troposphere, not quite so easy to explain why it 
should then remain constant in the stratosphere, but what about its next move? 
For from 217 K it proceeds to rise again -- in what is called the mesosphere -- to a 
new maximum which is nearly as high as at sea-level, perhaps 271 K; then, after 
a pause, down it goes again to another minimum at the top of the mesosphere. 
Estimates vary of just how cold it is at this height (only 80 kilometres, by the way, 
only the distance from London to Brighton), but all agree that it is lower than in 
the stratosphere, lower, that is to say, than anywhere on earth, perhaps 181 K 
( 92°C). But its strange behaviour doesn't stop at that and, once more after a 
pause at this level, as the name of the next region, the thermosphere, suggests, it 
proceeds to rise again, and this time it really excels itself rising steadily, inexorably 
to over 1200 K at 200 km, nearly 1500 K at 400 km, and still upward in the exos- 
phere until it reaches over 1500 K at the outer fringes of the atmosphere. 
378 MECHANICS OF FLIGHT 
Fig 13A Shuttle lift off 
(By courtesy of NASA) 
379 
SPACE FLIGHT 
Temperature 
changes 
Height in 
kilometres Divisions 
of the 
atmosphere 
Relative 
density 
Slight 
pause in 
temperature 
rise 
Small 
drop 
1499 K 
to 
1495 K 
Temperature rising
Thermosphere
Exosphere
Ionosphere
F layer 
E layer 
D layer 
Stratopause 
Constant 
181 K 
181 K 
271 K 
271 K 
271 K 
217 K 
217 K 
Falling 
Rising 
Constant 
Falling 
Constant 
Tropopause 
50 
Upper 
stratosphere 
Stratosphere 
Mesosphere 
Lower stratosphere 
Troposphere 
Lower 
atmosphere 
1508 K 
1506 K 
1496 K 
1499 K 
1488 K 
1487 K 
1464 K 
1432 K 
1357 K 
1236 K 
714 K 
210 K 
700 
650 
600 
550 
500 
450 
400 
350 
300 
250 
200 
150 
100 
1.26 10 --13 
3.8  10--13 
1.29 10 --12 
5.3  10--12 
2.9  10--11 
2.7  10--10 
4.06 10--7 
8.4  10--4 
7.26 10--2 
288to217K 
Fig 13.1 The upper atmosphere 
The figures given are based on the US Standard Atmosphere, 1962, which 
was prepared under the sponsorship of NASA, the USAF and the US 
Weather Bureau. 
An interesting point about these temperature changes in the upper atmos- 
phere is their effect upon the speed of sound which, as we learned in Chapter 
11, rises with the temperature, being proportional to the square root of the 
absolute temperature. The interest is not so much in the effects of this on 
shock waves, or on the flight of rockets, but rather in that one method of esti- 
mating the temperatures in the upper atmosphere is by measuring the speed of 
sound there. 
While these strange and erratic changes of temperature have been taking 
place the density and the pressure of the air have fallen to values that are so 
low that they are almost meaningless if expressed in the ordinary units of 
mechanics; at a mere 100 km, for instance, the density is less than one-mil- 
lionth of that at ground level. 
It is believed that at these heights there may be great winds, of hundreds, 
perhaps even a thousand kilometres per hour. The air above about the 70 km 
level is 'electrified' or ionised, that is to say it contains sufficient free electrons 
to affect the propagation of radio waves. For this reason the portion of the 
atmosphere above this level is sometimes called the ionosphere, which really 
overlaps both the mesosphere and the thermosphere. Then there are the mys- 
terious cosmic rays which come from outer space, and from which on the 
earth's surface we are protected by the atmosphere, but beyond this we know 
very little about them except that they may be the most dangerous hazard of 
all since they affect living tissues. Then there are the much more readily under- 
standable meteors, 'shooting stars' as we usually call them, but actually 
particles of stone or iron which have travelled through outer space and may 
enter the earth's atmosphere at speeds of 100 kilometres per second, and 
which have masses of anything from a tiny fraction of a gram up to hundreds 
of kilograms. The larger ones are very rare, but some of these have actually 
survived the passage through the atmosphere without burning up, and have 
'landed' on the earth causing craters of considerable size -- these are called 
meteorites. 
To prospective space travellers all this may sound rather alarming, but there 
are some redeeming features. The winds, for instance, wouldn't even 'stir the 
hair on one's head' for the simple reason that the air has practically no density, 
no substance. For the same reason the extreme temperatures are not 'felt' by a 
satellite or space-ship (what is felt is the temperature rise of the body itself, 
caused by the skin friction at the terrific speeds; it is this which burns up the 
meteors, it is this which has eventually caused the disintegration of many man- 
launched satellites on re-entering the atmosphere -- but all this has little or 
nothing to do with the actual temperature of the atmosphere). Then, as 
regards the very low densities and pressures, no-one is going to venture outside 
the vehicle, or walk in space, or even put his head out of the window to see 
whether the wind stirs the hair on his head, unless he is wearing a space-suit, 
and we have long ago learned to pressurise vehicles because this is required 
even for the modest heights in the lower atmosphere. Moreover, the strong 
outer casing of the vehicle which is required for pressurising will in itself give 
380 MECHANICS OF FLIGHT 
protection at least from the small and common meteors, and to some extent 
even from the cosmic rays, the greatest unknown. So altogether the prospect 
is not as bad as it might at first seem to be. 
The law of universal gravitation 
Now let us consider the motion of bodies in this upper atmosphere, and in the 
space beyond. 
If we throw a stone or cricket ball up into the air it goes up to a certain 
height, stops, and then comes down again. If we throw it vertically upwards it 
comes down on the same spot as that from which we threw it and, if we 
neglect the effects of air resistance, it returns with the same velocity down- 
wards as that with which we threw it upwards. Moreover, again neglecting air 
resistance, we can easily calculate how high it will go because we know that 
(at first, at any rate) it loses velocity as it travels upwards at the rate of 
9.81 m/s or, very roughly, 10 m/s every second, and gains it again at the same 
rate as it comes downwards. 
But we ought to know better by now than to neglect air resistance? Yes, we 
certainly ought to know better, but unfortunately it wasn't only air resistance 
that we were neglecting in the simple examples in Chapter 1 -- though, in fair- 
ness, that was our worst error, and our other omissions really were negligible 
in the circumstances that we were then considering. This is no longer true of 
the circumstances of this chapter for some of which air resistance really can be 
neglected, but other things that we calmly assumed most certainly cannot. 
Newton would probably have been less surprised than we were when arti- 
ficial satellites began to circle the globe -- for these are but examples of the laws 
he enunciated. 
When he saw the apple drop -- assuming that story is true -- he wondered 
why it did so, and eventually decided that it was because there was a mutual 
force of attraction between the apple and the earth; so it wasn't just a case of 
the apple dropping, it was the apple and the earth coming together, due to this 
mutual force of attraction, when there was no longer anything to hold them 
apart. And if the apple and the earth, why not any mass and any other mass? 
And so eventually, by observing the facts, and by reasoning, he came to realise 
that there is a force of attraction between any two masses, and that this force 
is proportional to the product of the masses, and inversely proportional to the 
square of the distance between them. This is the law of universal gravitation, 
perhaps the most important of all the physical laws, the law that governs the 
movement of bodies in space (whether they be natural or artificial), the law 
that Newton enunciated 300 years ago. 
381 
SPACE FLIGHT 
Escape from the earth 
Consider a stone thrown vertically from the earth's surface with an initial vel- 
ocity. Because the weight of the stone, caused by the gravitational attraction 
between the stone and the earth, opposes the stone's motion its velocity will 
be reduced with time (i.e. the stone has an acceleration g towards the earth). 
With a normal initial velocity gravitational acceleration will stop the stone at 
a certain height above the earth's surface and it will then reverse direction and 
accelerate towards the earth, eventually arriving at its launch point with its 
launch velocity but in the reverse direction (if air resistance is neglected). 
For moderate initial velocity it is sufficiently accurate to assume that the 
weight (and hence g) is constant. What happens, though, if the initial velocity 
is large enough for a great height to be reached before the stone's direction of 
travel is reversed? 
The weight of the stone, in accordance with the law of gravitation, is 
inversely proportional to the square of the distance between the masses. So 
supposing that the stone has a mass of 1 kilogram it will, at the surface of the 
earth, have a weight of 981 N. But what if it is moved away from the earth's 
surface altogether? What if it is thrown upwards 1 kilometre, 100, 1000, 6000 
kilometres? Let us pause here for a moment because the radius of the earth is 
not much more than 6000 km, 6370 km in fact, so at a distance of 6370 km 
from the earth's surface, the force of attraction, i.e. the weight of the stone, 
being inversely proportional to the square of the distance from the centre of 
the earth -- now doubled -- will only be 1/4 of its weight at the earth's surface; 
similarly, at 12 740 km it will be 1/9, at 19 110 km only 1/16, and so on (see 
Fig. 13.2). Notice that in the figure the distances are given from the centre of 
the earth, and not from the earth's surface; for the earth is a very small thing 
in space, and if we are to understand the mechanics of space we must think 
more and more of the mass of the earth as concentrated at its centre. 
The mass of the stone of course does not change, but as the weight changes 
so also does the acceleration (g) in proportion -- this is just Newton's Second 
Law again. So the rate at which the stone loses speed on the outward 'flight', 
though starting at 9.81 m/s2, gets less and less as the distance from the centre 
of the earth increases. This makes it more difficult to calculate how far the 
stone will go with a given starting velocity, but it has an even more interesting 
and important effect than this. For think of the stone returning to earth again; 
at great distances the rate at which it picks up speed will be very small, but the 
rate will increase until at the earth's surface it reaches the definite and finite 
value of 9.81 m/s2. This, it will be noticed, is a maximum rate of increase, and 
it can be shown mathematically that even if the stone starts from what the 
mathematicians call infinity (which means so far away that it couldn't come 
from any farther!) the velocity reached will also have a definite and finite 
maximum value, which is in fact 11.184 km/s (about 40 250 km/h). So, if a 
stone is 'dropped' onto the earth from infinity, it will hit the earth at 11.184 
382 MECHANICS OF FLIGHT 
km/s; and, by the same token, if it is thrown vertically from the earth at 11.184 
km/s it will travel to infinity -- and never return. This velocity is called the 
escape velocity. If it is thrown with any velocity less than this, it will return. 
What happens if it is thrown from the earth at a velocity greater than the 
escape velocity? Or is this not possible? Yes, it is not only possible, but in a 
sense it has been done though not quite in this simple way. And all that 
happens is that it still has a velocity away from the earth when it reaches 
infinity -- and so will go beyond infinity -- but since infinity is the limit of our 
imagination perhaps it will be best to leave it at that. The reader may have 
noticed that to simplify things, we have only considered the earth's attraction 
on the stone, and the rest of the universe has been left out! But still the prin- 
ciple is illustrated. 
It is important to remember that although the force of gravity, the weight 
of the stone, gets less and less as it travels farther and farther from the earth it 
never ceases altogether (at least not until the stone reaches infinity which is 
only another way of saying 'never'). It is often stated, quite incorrectly, that 
'escape' from the earth means getting away from the pull of the earth. This we 
383 
SPACE FLIGHT 
Distance from 
centre of earth 
Weight compared with 
weight at surface 
(63 700 km) 10R 
9R 
8R 
7R 
6R 
5R 
4R 
3R 
2R 
(6370 km) R 1 
1 
100 
1 
81 
1 
64 
1 
49 
1 
36 
1 
25 
1 
16 
19 
14 
Fig 13.2 How weight varies with height 
R radius of earth, i.e. approx. 670 km 
can never do, the earth 'pulls' on all other bodies wherever they are -- that after 
all, is the universal law of gravitation. Why then do astronauts talk about 
'weightlessness'? -- and even demonstrate it? -- we shall soon see. 
In the meantime, it will be noticed that we have already introduced a new 
unit of velocity, the kilometre per second. Our reason for this is simply one of 
convenience; in this part of the subject we have to deal with very high speeds, 
and it is easier to remember these speeds, and even to think what they mean, 
as kilometres per second, than as so many thousands of knots, or metres per 
second. At the same time we must remember that our old friend g is still in 
m/s2, so if we wish to use any of the standard formulae of mechanics we must 
be careful to convert the velocities into metres per second. 
Projectiles and satellites 
Among the many assumptions so far made one of the most impracticable has 
been the idea of leaving the earth's surface at speeds of about 11 km/s. 
But we all know the answer to this problem now, and it lies in rocket 
propulsion; by this means the acceleration is so comparatively gentle that it 
can even be withstood by human beings, at any rate in the lying down pos- 
ition. 
When we consider the use of rockets to propel bodies to great heights or 
into a space a new complication is introduced in that owing to the great rate 
of fuel consumption the very mass of the projectile decreases rapidly, so we 
have the double effect of mass decreasing with fuel consumption and weight 
decreasing with distance from the earth. Moreover, in multi-stage rockets, 
which are the only practical means of achieving the velocities required for 
launching into space, there is a further decrease in mass each time a stage is 
completed and a part of the rocket is detached. The final mass that becomes a 
satellite, or goes off into space never to return, is but a small fraction of the 
mass at take-off. 
In the interests of fuel economy turbojets, or better still ramjets, may be 
used for the flight of projectiles while they pass through the earth's atmosphere, 
but in space rockets are the only means of powered propulsion, and all jour- 
neys in space are dependent on rockets and the law of universal gravitation. 
In order to get our ideas straight we have so far considered the motion of 
missiles in a straight line -- straight up and down from the earth's surface. We 
did the same thing in Chapter 1 in dealing with ordinary mechanics, but then 
we graduated to the much more interesting motion on curved paths; this is 
what we are going to do now. 
What happens if instead of throwing the stone vertically we throw it hori- 
zontally? -- still neglecting the effects of air resistance. 
It will start with no vertical velocity, but will immediately begin to acquire 
a downward velocity at the rate of roughly 10 m/s2 -- meanwhile it will retain 
384 MECHANICS OF FLIGHT 
its horizontal velocity. After 1 sec it will have fallen about 5 m, after 2 sec 
20 m, and so on. If its initial horizontal velocity was 100 m/s, and if it was 
launched from a height of 30 m, its path of travel would be something like (a) 
in Fig. 13.3, or if it was launched from twice the height, like (b). If its initial 
horizontal velocity was 200 m/s, its path of travel would be more like (c) or 
(d) respectively. 
It will be quite clear from these figures that the distance it will travel over 
the ground before striking the ground depends on the height at which it is pro- 
jected, and the horizontal velocity with which it is projected (the velocity being 
more important than the height). If it is projected at ground level it won't get 
any distance before hitting the ground whatever its horizontal velocity; on the 
other hand, if it is projected from considerable height, and at a considerable 
horizontal velocity, it will travel a considerable distance horizontally before 
reaching the ground. The path of flight, or trajectory, is a mathematical curve 
called a parabola. 
But now we have been guilty of making yet another assumption -- has the 
reader noticed it? In the figures, and in our reasoning, we have assumed that 
the earth is flat. Not just that it is free of hills and dales (these won't affect its 
flight path but they may obviously affect the point at which it hits the ground), 
but that the earth is itself a flat plane instead of being spherical or very nearly 
so. Such an assumption has no practical significance in the flight of stones or 
385 
SPACE FLIGHT 
Height of launch
100m 100m
(b) 
(a) 
50 
m/s 
5 
20 45 80 125 180 metres drop 
50 
m/s5 204580 
0 
100 
200 
300 
400 
Horizontal distance, metres 
Height of launch
100m 100m
(d) 
(c) 
52 
0 
45 
80 
125 
180 metres drop 
100 m/s 
5 
20 
45 
80 
0 
100 
200 
300 
400 
Horizontal distance, metres 
500 
600 
700 
100 m/s 
Fig 13.3 Bodies launched horizontally -- paths of flight 
cricket balls -- but is all-important in the flight of high-speed projectiles. The 
curvature of the earth will affect the path of the projectile, and the distance it 
travels before striking the ground, for two reasons -- first, because if the pro- 
jectile didn't 'fall' towards the earth it would go off at a tangent and so get 
farther and farther away; secondly, because although the force of gravity 
acting on the body is always 'vertical' in the sense that it is always towards the 
centre of the earth, the direction of the vertical will change in space and this 
will change the shape of the curve -- in mathematical terms it means that the 
trajectory is an ellipse rather than a parabola. These effects are shown in the 
figure (Fig. 13.4) -- hopelessly exaggerated of course in the case of a stone or 
cricket ball, or even an ordinary shell fired from an ordinary gun, but not by 
any means exaggerated for modern rocket-propelled high-speed ballistic mis- 
siles and not, in this figure, even going as far as the man-launched satellite or 
space-ship. 
It should now be clear that the greater the speed with which a projectile is 
launched from a given height above the earth's surface in a horizontal direc- 
tion, the larger will be the curve it describes and so the greater will be the 
distance it travels before it hits the surface; in other words, the greater will be 
the range. 
The actual range, of course, depends on the direction of launch as well as 
the speed and height but at first it is easier to consider only horizontal 
launches. And by 'launching' we mean that the projectile is given a velocity 
and then left to itself -- and so becomes subject to the mechanics of ballistics. 
If it continues to be rocket-propelled almost anything may happen! 
If we take 'launch' to have this meaning, then the launch conditions can be 
achieved at the end of the 'launch cycle' involving, usually, rocket propulsion 
between the earth's surface and the launch point where the rocket is switched 
off and the body left to the mercy of ballistics. 
Let us assume then that we are launching a projectile horizontally from a 
height of 800 km above the earth's surface. This besides being a nice round 
figure is well outside any appreciable effects of the earth's atmosphere, and 
although it is even farther beyond the ceiling of 'aeroplanes' it is within the 
reach of multi-stage rockets. To those of us who are accustomed to think of 
heights in thousands of feet or metres it sounds a great height (eight hundred 
386 MECHANICS OF FLIGHT 
Curvature of earth's surface 
Path of projectile 
Direction of force of gravity 
Fig 13.4 Path of projectile -- curved earth 
thousand metres), but in terms of space travel it is practically nothing, only 
one eighth of the radius of the earth away from the surface, about one four 
hundred and eightieth of the distance to the moon, and one hundred thou- 
sandth of the distance to the sun. At this height the weight of a body and the 
acceleration due to gravity are reduced by about 20 per cent of what they were 
at the earth's surface. 
So much then for conditions at our launching platform, let us now see what 
happens as we increase the velocity of a horizontal launch. At first the projec- 
tile will simply get farther and farther round the earth, but always coming 
down to earth again at some point less than half way round (Fig. 13.5a, over- 
leaf). Then at a certain velocity (about 7.16 km/s or 25 800 km/h) a most 
exciting thing will happen (or at least it would happen if it were not for our 
old enemy air resistance) -- the projectile will just miss the surface on the far 
side of the earth and will then gain height again, and, perhaps most exciting 
of all, will circle the earth and come round to where it started -- and will then 
repeat the performance -- and so on. The projectile has become a satellite -- it 
is travelling round the earth under its own steam as it were (Fig. 13.5b). 
Unfortunately it can never happen quite like this because although it was 
clear of air resistance at the launch, on the far side it would have come right 
through the atmosphere to ground level and so would burn up owing to the 
heat created or, even if it could be shielded in some way from this, it would 
lose speed and fall to the earth. 
But we have only got to increase the launching velocity a little further and 
the projectile will then miss the far side of the earth by an appreciable margin, 
and when this is say 300 km, it will miss most of the atmosphere and so con- 
tinue to circle the earth on an elliptical orbit, clearing it by 800 km on one side 
and 300 km on the other -- in any such orbit the point at the greatest distance 
from the centre of the earth is called the apogee, and the point nearest the 
centre of the earth the perigee. Our projectile is now a practical satellite -- prac- 
tical, but still not very probable. 
Even at a height of 300 km there is some atmosphere, and there probably is 
even at 800 km for that matter, so this satellite will lose speed every time it 
dips into the atmosphere, and so will gradually lose the energy given to it at 
the launch and will sooner or later come down to earth on a spiral path. 
But we need not be disheartened, because a further increase of launching 
speed will further increase the clearance on the far side, and so gradually elim- 
inate this problem until, at a launching speed of about 7.48 km/s we reach 
another interesting stage at which the satellite -- we can no longer call it a pro- 
jectile -- travels round the earth on a circular path, 800 km from the earth's 
surface, and there is no longer any distinction between the apogee and the 
perigee (Fig. 13.5c). The launching speed at which this occurs is called the cir- 
cular velocity. 
After this long story the reader will probably be able to guess what happens 
with further increase of launching speed. Yes, the circle again becomes an 
ellipse but the apogee, or farthest point, is now on the far side of the earth and 
387 
SPACE FLIGHT 
the perigee is the point of launch (Fig. 13.5d). Still further increases of speed 
make the ellipse more and more elongated with the apogee getting farther and 
farther from the earth. It will not be difficult to understand why this type of 
orbit is frequently used; it practically eliminates the problems of air resistance, 
it is not dependent on an exact launching speed and it allows scope for travel 
at the apogee to great distances and so, for instance, for passing beyond the 
moon or other planets, or hitting them. 
Is this the end of the story? Not quite. Strange as it may seem the ellipse 
cannot be stretched indefinitely, and at a launching speed of about 10.7 km/s 
-- different speeds at different heights -- the ellipse becomes an open curve, a 
parabola, and the satellite travelling on this open curve escapes from the earth 
for ever, and becomes a satellite of the sun (Fig. 13.5e). Yes, this is the escape 
velocity again, and it only differs numerically from the previous one because 
388 MECHANICS OF FLIGHT 
More than
38 000 km/h
(10.55 km/s)
More than
27 000 km/h
(7.48 km/s)
27 000 km/h
(7.48 km/s) 25 800 km/h
(7.16 km/s) 25 800 km/h
(7.16 km/s)
(a) 
(b) 
(c) 
(d) 
(e) 
Perigee 
Apogee 
Fig 13.5 Earth satellites 
Speeds refer to horizontal launches from 800 km above the earth's 
surface, in the interests of clarity this distance has been exaggerated in 
comparison with the radius of the earth. 
we are now launching from 800 km instead of from ground level. So the 
escape velocity is the highest velocity at which a body can be launched in any 
direction and be expected either to orbit the earth or return to it again -- above 
that speed, speaking vulgarly, we have had it. Above that speed, too, the path 
of travel changes from a parabola to a different open curve called a hyperbola, 
but this is a subtle change for a subtle reason, and it need not worry us. 
This is not quite the end of the story as at even higher speeds there comes 
a point where the object can escape from the solar system and carry on out 
into space indefinitely. 
The mechanics of circular orbits 
So much for the story of what happens -- what is the explanation of it all? In 
the particular case of the circular orbit the satellite is very like a stone on the 
end of a string stretching from the centre of the earth to the satellite; the satel- 
lite is all the time trying to go off at a tangent but is being given an acceleration 
towards the centre by the centripetal force which is of course the force of 
gravity. So, near the earth's surface, if we neglect air resistance, the centripetal 
force will be the weight of the satellite, and the acceleration towards the centre 
will be 9.81 m/s2. Notice that a body circling the earth is accelerating towards 
the centre at the same rate as a body falling straight towards the earth. So we 
can easily calculate the circular velocity near the earth's surface because the 
acceleration v2/r (see page 14). 
Now r is the radius of the earth, say 6370 km (6 370 000 m), so v2/r g, 
i.e. v2/6 370 000 9.81 
v2 62490000 
v 7905m/s 
7.9 km/s approx 
28 440 km/h approx 
How long will the satellite take to make a complete circuit of the earth at this speed? 
Circumference of earth 2p 6370 km 
So time of circuit at 28 440 km/h 
(2p 6370)/28 440 
1.41 hours or about 
1 hour 25 minutes 
389 
SPACE FLIGHT 
It will be noticed that the circular velocity we have calculated, i.e. 7.9 km/s, is 
higher than the circular velocity at 800 km from the earth's surface, i.e. 7.48 
km/s; but there is no mystery in that and we can easily work it out for our- 
selves by replacing the earth's radius of 6370 km by 7170 km, and reducing g 
by 20 per cent, i.e. to about 7.85 m/s2. The value of v2, and so of v, will then 
be less because whereas the value of g is reduced by 20 per cent, the value of 
r is only increased by 12 per cent -- this, in turn, is because the value of g 
depends on the force of gravity, which is inversely proportional to the square 
of the distance r. 
And what will be the time of a complete circuit at 800 km from the earth's 
surface? The distance is greater, the speed less, so the time of orbit will be 
greater. Work it out and you will find that it is about 1 hr 40 min. Similarly at 
1600 km the circular velocity is about 6.9 km/s and the time of orbit nearly 2 
hours. 
A distance of 35 400 km from the earth gives a particularly interesting cir- 
cular orbit because the time of a complete circuit is 24 hours; so a satellite 
travelling at this speed -- in the right direction, of course -- remains over one 
spot on the earth; a communication satellite such as is used for transmitting 
TV and radio signals from one part of the earth to another. 
Then at about 385 000 km the circular velocity is a mere 3700 km/h (just 
over 1 km/s), and the time of orbit 28 days -- but on that circuit we already 
have a satellite that surpasses in many ways any so far launched by man -- the 
moon. 
And now we can answer an obvious question -- why doesn't the moon fall on 
to the earth? Because it is revolving round the earth at just such velocity and radius 
that the centripetal force is provided by the gravitational attraction, in other 
words, in a sense it is 'weightless' -- and this applies to all those bodies in orbit, 
whether circular or not, and to all the people and things inside them. Strictly 
speaking they are not weightless at all; in fact it is their weight, the force of attrac- 
tion between them and the earth (or moon) which they are orbiting, that keeps 
them in orbit and prevents them from going off at a tangent. They merely seem to 
be weightless, and that is why a man can get out of a space-ship while in orbit, and 
continue in orbit himself, just like the space-ship, without any fear of 'falling' back 
to earth or to anywhere else. Although he may be travelling at several kilometres 
per second he has no sense of speed, and apparently no weight -- he just floats, and 
has no difficulty in keeping near the space-ship which is also just floating! More 
correctly the man, and the space-ship, and all the other things in orbit, are falling 
freely, are accelerating towards the earth because of the attraction of the earth -- 
in short because of their weight -- so much for weightlessness! In the same sense 
the moon is falling towards the earth, though it never gets any nearer! 
Notice that the reader can calculate all these circular velocities and times of 
orbit for himself, including that of the moon. For at all distances from the 
centre of the earth, the condition for a circular orbit is that the acceleration 
towards the centre shall be the 'g' or acceleration of gravity at that distance; 
this we might call gd, and it must be equal to v2/d. 
12 
390 MECHANICS OF FLIGHT 
But gd is also proportional to the force of gravity, which is inversely pro- 
portional to the square of the distance. 
Since at the earth's radius r, the acceleration is g, 
gdwillbeg r2/d2 
Therefore for circular velocity at any distance d, 
v2/d g r2/d2 
i.e. v2 gr2/d. 
Figure 13.6 (overleaf) shows circular orbits at different distances from the 
centre of the earth. 
It shows how a whole system of bodies can circle the earth, of their own 
free will as it were (once they have been put in orbit), and how the farther out 
the orbit the slower is the speed. It rather reminds one of the way in which Sir 
James Jeans once described the solar system as being like the traffic in 
Piccadilly Circus, with 'the traffic nearest the centre moving fastest, that 
farther out more slowly, while that at the extreme edge merely crawls -- at least 
by comparison with the fast traffic near the centre.'* But there is an important 
distinction between the solar system -- the work of nature -- and bodies 
orbiting the earth -- the work of man (except for the moon); in the solar 
system, again to quote Sir James Jeans, there is only 'one-way traffic', and the 
orbits of the planets round the sun are mostly circular, or very nearly so, 
whereas the man-made satellites orbit the earth in various directions and, as 
we shall soon discover, some of their paths are very far from circular. 
When talking of the interesting possibilities of a 24-hour circuit we men- 
tioned the direction of rotation. This would be all important in this case 
because if the satellite was rotating round the equator in the same direction as 
the earth's rotation it would stay over the same spot on the earth's surface but 
if it was travelling in the opposite direction -- well, what would it do? Would 
it go twice round in a day? or would it merely appear to do so? or what? 
But the fact that the earth is rotating will of course affect all launches, 
because it means that we are launching from a moving platform. The surface 
of the earth at the equator is travelling at a speed of rather over 1600 km/h 
owing to the spin of the earth on its axis, so a body launched in the same direc- 
tion, i.e. towards the east, will already have the advantage of this speed and so 
will need 1600 km/h less extra speed to achieve circular velocity, escape vel- 
ocity, or whatever it may be. Towards the west it will need 1600 km/h more 
extra speed. There can also be circuits of the earth in other planes altogether, 
391 
SPACE FLIGHT 
*The quotation from The Stars in their Courses by Sir James Jeans is given by 
courtesy of the Cambridge University Press. 
e.g. over the poles, and in these cases the effect of the earth's rotation on 
launching and orbiting is more complicated. 
It is not always realised, and it is interesting to note, that since the earth's 
surface at the equator is travelling at about 1600 km/h all bodies on the earth 
are in a sense trying to be satellites, and to go straight on instead of following 
the curvature of the earth. Thus there are two reasons why a body of the same 
mass weighs less at the equator than at the poles, first because it is farther from 
the centre of the earth so the true gravitational attraction is less, and secondly, 
because a proportion of the gravitational force has to provide the centripetal 
acceleration. How much is this centripetal force? Is it appreciable? Well, work 
it out for yourself. Take the actual velocity as 1690 km/h, the radius of the 
392 MECHANICS OF FLIGHT 
385 000 km radius -- Speed, 3 700 km/h (1 km/s) -- Time of orbit 28 days 
The 
moon 
Distance from earth not to scale 
35 400 km radius: Speed? Time of orbit 24h 
20 000 km radius: Speed? Time of orbit? 
Speed 24 840 km/h 
(6.9 k/s) 
7970km 
radius 
Time 
of orbit 2h 
7 170 km radius, 
i.e. 800 km from earth's 
surface: speed 26 900 km/h 
(7.48 km/s); time of orbit 
1h40min 
At earth's surface: 
6 370 km radius; 
speed 28 440 km/h 
(7.9 km/s); time of orbit 
1h25min 
Fig 13.6 Circular orbits at different distances from centre of the earth 
Note. The speed at 35 400 km radius, and the speed and time of orbit at 
20 000 km radius, have been left for the reader to work out for himself. 
earth as 6370 km, g as 9.81 m/s2, and you will find that the centrifugal force 
on a mass of1kg is about0.018N. 
Escape velocity and circular velocity 
As already established the velocity for a circular orbit is given by the formula -- 
vc2 gr2/d 
where r is the radius of the earth, and d the distance from the centre of the 
earth. 
At the earth's surface d r 
vc2 gr. 
Can the escape velocity be calculated equally simply? Very nearly so. If we go 
back to the idea of a body being projected vertically from the earth's surface 
with sufficient kinetic energy to enable it to do work against the force of grav- 
itation all the way to infinity, then if the escape velocity is denoted by the 
symbol ue the 
kinetic energy of a mass m will be mve2. 
This kinetic energy must be sufficient to provide the energy needed to lift m 
from the earth's surface to infinity. At a particular height above the earth, the 
energy needed to lift m one more metre is equal to its weight which equals mg 
at the earth's surface, and decreases all the way to infinity when it will be zero. 
Since the weight changes and since the change is not a simple ratio but 
inversely as the square of the distance, it needs the principles of calculus to 
estimate the total work done, but the answer is very simple; it is the same as 
the weight at the earth's surface mg the radius of the earth, i.e. mgr. 
So 
mve2 mgr 
or 
ve2 2gr 
but 
ve2 gr 
ve  vc  2 
i.e. Escape velocity  2 Velocity of circular orbit at that radius. 
12 
1 
2 
393 
SPACE FLIGHT 
Thus there is a simple relationship between all escape velocities and all circular 
velocities at a given radius from a mass such as that of the earth, or moon, or 
sun -- the escape velocity is 1.41 the circular velocity, or 41 per cent more. 
Elliptical orbits 
So much for circular orbits -- now what about the elliptical orbits which, as we 
have already explained, are much more common for artificial satellites? They 
are also more common in nature, the orbit of the moon round the earth being 
one of the few examples of a nearly circular orbit. 
Mathematically it is a little more difficult to calculate what happens during 
an elliptical orbit when both the velocity and the radius are constantly 
changing, but the reader who has followed the arguments so far should have 
no difficulty in understanding the principles involved. Returning to horizontal 
launches from a height of 800 km it will be remembered that at a speed of 
launch of 7.48 km/s the orbit was circular, below and above this speed it was 
elliptical, though at the escape velocity of 10.7 km/s it became an open curve, 
a parabola, and then above this a hyperbola. The real criterion is how much 
energy, kinetic energy, the body has when it is launched; because it is this 
energy which enables it to do work against the force of gravity -- it is really 
much more like the case of the stone that was thrown vertically upwards than 
might at first appear. In vertical ascent the kinetic energy given to the body at 
the launch enables it to do work against gravity and so gradually acquire 
potential energy; at the highest point reached all the kinetic energy has become 
potential energy; then as the body falls again the potential energy is lost and 
kinetic energy regained until on striking the ground the original kinetic energy 
has all been regained (neglecting air resistance of course). The body travelling 
on a curved path also has to work against gravity, is also accelerating all the 
time, and downwards, just like the body on the vertical path, and in fact, at 
the same rate -- once that is understood, all is clear. 
The only difference then is that on curved paths the body must retain some 
of its kinetic energy throughout the circuit if it is to continue on its orbit. At a 
launching height of 800 km it has at the start both kinetic and potential 
energy; if the launching speed is less than the circular velocity of 7.48 km/s, but 
sufficient to ensure that it doesn't come down to earth before reaching the far 
side, then by the time the body reaches the far side of the earth it will have 
dropped in height, i.e. lost some of its potential energy, but by the same token 
will have gained some kinetic energy (just like the falling stone), and so will be 
travelling faster -- at over 7.9 km/s in fact if it is near the earth's surface. Then 
as it returns to the starting point it will gain potential energy, rising again to 
800 km, and lose kinetic energy, until the proportions (and values) are the 
same as they were at the launch. In all this we are still neglecting air resistance, 
394 MECHANICS OF FLIGHT 
and it is air resistance which in practice makes an orbit of this kind imposs- 
ible; for as soon as the body travelling round the earth, and getting lower all 
the time, meets appreciable air density, it will experience drag, and in working 
against this will lose kinetic energy and so the speed necessary to take it round 
the far side of the earth. Thus it will fall to the ground before getting half way 
round or the heat generated by kinetic heating will cause it to burn up. 
As the launching speed gets nearer the circular velocity, the body will keep 
clear of appreciable atmosphere all the way round, and the orbit becomes 
more practical. But until the circular velocity is reached the launching point 
will be the apogee, and the perigee will be on the far side of the earth, where 
the body will be nearer the earth's surface, and where the velocity will increase 
until, at the circular velocity, it remains constant all the way round. 
As the launching speed is increased above the circular velocity, the body will 
have more kinetic energy than is necessary to keep the 800 km of height, and 
so it will gain height and potential energy, at the same time losing speed and 
kinetic energy, until it passes round the far side of the earth -- now the apogee 
-- at lower velocity and greater height. And so it will go on as the launching 
speed is still further increased, the ellipse becoming more and more elongated, 
the apogee getting farther and farther from the earth, and the residual velocity 
at the apogee getting less and less. 
As the launching velocity approaches the escape velocity of 10.7 km/s, the 
body at the apogee will only just have sufficient kinetic energy to enable it to 
get over the top, as it were, and return again to earth. If launched at the escape 
velocity, or above, it won't even be able to do this, and it will go off into space 
on its parabola, or hyperbola as the case may be, at the mercy of the gravita- 
tional attraction of some other body, probably the sun. This new force of 
attraction will restore its kinetic energy and velocity as it embarks on a com- 
pletely new orbit, possibly of enormous size like that of the earth round the 
sun (radius of orbit about 150 million kilometres). 
Since nearly all practical orbits are in the form of ellipses it is interesting to 
consider some of the properties of these curves. The reader may know that an 
ellipse can be drawn on paper with a pencil and a piece of string of fixed length 
attached to two pins (Fig. 13.7, overleaf). In other words, an ellipse is the locus 
of a point moving so that the sum of the distances from these two points (the 
pins) is constant. These points are called the foci of the ellipse -- in a circle, 
which is only a particular case of an ellipse, they coincide -- and it will be 
noticed that in the figures illustrating the paths of satellites the centre of the 
earth is always one of the foci of the ellipse. 
At launching speeds below the circular velocity the centre of the earth is the 
focus farthest from the launch, at the circular velocity it is of course the centre 
of the circular orbit, and at higher launching speeds it is the focus nearest to 
the launch, the other focus getting farther and farther away as the launching 
speed is increased. For launches at the escape velocity the distant focus has 
gone to infinity, and only one focus is left at the centre of the earth -- a para- 
bolic curve has only one focus. Above the escape velocity, too, the hyperbolic 
395 
SPACE FLIGHT 
curve has only one focus (see Fig. 13.8); strictly speaking, a hyperbola has two 
foci, but this is because there are two parts of the curve, back to back as it 
were, and we are here only concerned with one part of the curve. 
It is not of practical importance in understanding the mechanics of projec- 
tiles and satellites, but it may be of interest to know that these curves are all 
derived from a cone (they are the intersections of a plane and the surface of a 
cone) and are sometimes called 'conic sections' (Fig. 13.9). 
Going to the moon? 
Now let us get just a little nearer to the true state of affairs by realising at least 
the existence of the moon. How will this affect the stone that is thrown verti- 
cally from the earth? 
396 MECHANICS OF FLIGHT 
Pin A 
Pin B 
String 
Fig 13.7 Drawing an ellipse 
Focus 
Focus 
(a)( 
b) 
Fig 13.8 (a) a parabola, (b) a hyperbola 
Well, it will affect it quite simply, in principle at any rate, in that there will 
now be three masses all attracting each other -- the stone, the earth and the 
moon. 
The moon is about 385 000 km away from the earth. Just for the moment 
let us suppose that it remains over the point on the earth's surface from which 
we throw the stone, and that we increase the starting velocity of the stone until 
it reaches distances of 6370 km, 12 740 km, and so on. As before, the weight 
will decrease with the distance from the earth's surface, but now rather more 
so because a new factor has been introduced, the attraction between the moon 
and the stone. The mass of the moon is only about 1/81 of the mass of the 
earth, so the force of attraction at the same distance will only be a fraction of 
that of the earth (1/81 in fact), but as we know the moon's attraction is a very 
real thing, even at the earth's surface, for it is largely responsible for the tides. 
We have already imagined so much that we may as well go one step further 
and imagine that our stone travels in a straight line between earth and moon. 
As it gets nearer to the moon the attraction of the earth will decrease and that 
of the moon increase, until a point is reached where the two attractions are the 
same. Since the force is inversely proportional to the square of the distance, 
the distance from the centre of the moon at which this occurs will be 1/ 81 
of the distance from the centre of the earth, or approximately one ninth (Fig. 
13.10, overleaf); roughly say 39 000 km from the moon and 346 000 km from 
the earth. So if a stone is launched with just sufficient velocity to reach this 
point, it will stay there -- and will once more be 'weightless', this time perhaps 
more correctly so, though again we notice that it is just a question of the forces 
being balanced. In fact the balance is too delicate, and the stone will not in fact 
stay at this neutral position, because some other heavenly body will attract it 
and tip the balance, and it will fall either onto the earth or the moon. If the 
stone is launched with a velocity slightly greater than that required to reach 
this neutral point, it will still be travelling towards the moon at this point, and 
since as it passes the point the attraction of the moon will become greater than 
that of the earth the stone will pick up speed and fall on to the moon. 
397 
SPACE FLIGHT 
Circle 
Ellipse 
Parabola 
Hyperbola 
(a)( 
b)( 
c)( 
d) 
a 
a 
a 
a 
Fig 13.9 Conic sections 
In (a) the plane cuts the cone at right angles to the centre line, forming a 
circle. In (b) the plane is at an acute angle to the centre line, but the angle 
is greater than a, forming an ellipse. In (c) the angle is equal to a, forming 
a parabola. In (d) the angle is less than a, forming a hyperbola. 
It has already been emphasised that all bodies attract all other bodies, and 
that therefore one can never really escape from the gravitational attraction of 
all the bodies in the heavens. But the motion of a body in space becomes 
extremely complicated if the forces of attraction on it of even three bodies 
(such as the sun, the moon, and the earth) are taken into account, and for this 
reason it is convenient -- and not very far wrong -- to consider a zone of influ- 
ence for each body, this being a sphere in space in which that particular body 
has a greater gravitational effect than a larger body. The earth, of course, is 
well within the sun's zone of influence -- its motion round the sun is in fact con- 
trolled by the force of attraction between it and the sun -- but on the other 
hand, bodies near the earth's surface, although attracted by the sun, come 
much more under the influence of the earth's attraction than that of the sun 
(which is perhaps just as well, since otherwise we would all be off to the sun). 
The attraction of the earth remains greater than that of the sun for a distance 
of about a million kilometres, so the earth's zone of influence relative to the 
sun is a sphere of about one million kilometres radius (Fig. 13.11). Similarly 
the moon's zone of influence relative to the earth is a sphere of about 39 000 
km radius -- as we discovered in the last paragraph, though we didn't give it 
that name. 
Well, we have described one way of getting to the moon -- to go straight 
there in fact -- but it is not quite so easy as it sounds because of the great accu- 
racy needed both in aim and launching speed. As regards aim, we have made 
398 MECHANICS OF FLIGHT 
39 000 km
Moon 
Neutral point 
346 000 km
Earth 
Fig 13.10 Neutral point between earth and moon 
things much too easy in our imagination; in reality the earth is travelling round 
the sun, and is spinning on its own axis, while the moon is travelling round 
the earth. But even more interesting is the sensitivity to exact velocity. 
The distance of 385 000 km to the moon is much less than the distance to 
infinity, only a minute fraction of it, and to the neutral point even less, but it 
requires nearly as much energy to reach this distance as it does to reach infinity 
because the attraction of the earth at this distance has been so reduced that 
nearly all the serious work in overcoming the earth's gravity has already been 
done; or, putting it another way, whereas 11.184 km/s is needed to send the 
stone to infinity, about 11.168 km/s is needed to send it to the neutral point 
from which it will drop on the moon. So if launched at less than 11.168 km/s 
it will return to earth; at about 11.168 km/s it will go to the moon; at 11.184 
km/s it will go to infinity (it could hit the moon on the way); and at over 
11.184 km/s -- well, we have mentioned that before. 
The mass of the moon being so much less than that of the earth, its escape vel- 
ocity is only about 2.4 km/s, and that is the speed at which the stone would 
arrive on the moon if it 'fell' from infinity; it will for all practical purposes be the 
same if it falls the 39 000 km from the neutral point. This is about the muzzle 
399 
SPACE FLIGHT 
Moon's zone of 
influence relative 
to the earth 
Sun 
150 000 000 km 
from earth 
385 000 
km 
Earth's orbit 
round the sun 
Moon's orbit 
round the earth 
Earth's zone of 
influence relative 
to the sun 
Fig 13.11 Zones of influence 
Not to scale. 
velocity of a shell as it leaves a long-range gun, and so the landing on the moon 
will not be a very soft one, and this is the minimum speed at which the stone can 
arrive unless there is some means of slowing it down; there is no 'atmosphere' to 
do this, and the only hope is to break the fall by rockets fired towards the moon. 
Another way to the moon 
But man has been to the moon -- more than once -- and has come back again; 
perhaps even more remarkable the Russians have sent spacecraft to the moon -- 
without a man -- have brought at least one back with samples, and have driven 
a moon-bug about on the surface! How has it been done? For the answer we 
must go back to circular and elliptical orbits. For a horizontal speed of launch of 
10.46 km/s (just below the escape velocity), from a height of about 800 km, gives 
an elliptical orbit which will strike the moon, and at velocities of launch slightly 
above this, orbits will pass round both the earth and the moon (Fig. 13.12). 
But the moon isn't such an easy target as all that! The shape and size of the 
elliptical orbit is very sensitive to the exact direction and velocity of launch, 
and moreover the moon is itself travelling at rather over 3700 km/h, whereas 
the speed of the satellite at its apogee will only be about 700 km/h. Also, if the 
launch from the earth is made in an easterly direction -- to take advantage of 
the earth's rotation and consequent circumferential speed of 1600 km/h -- the 
satellite at 700 km/h will be chasing the moon at 3700 km/h in the same direc- 
tion; so it will be a case of the moon hitting the satellite rather than the satellite 
hitting the moon -- not that it matters which hits which, but it does mean that 
the satellite should be launched in the other direction and so approach the 
moon from the front, as it were, instead of chasing it. 
In practice the initial launch must be made from ground level (Fig. 13B, 
overleaf), and not from an altitude of 800 km, and it has been calculated that 
if the satellite is guided only during the launching phase, and if the angle of 
launch is exactly correct, there must not be an error of more than 23 m/s in the 
launching speed of 11 125 m/s; or if the velocity is exactly correct the angle of 
launch must be accurate to within 0.01°. If the satellite is to pass round the 
moon and the earth the accuracy must be even greater, so much so that some 
guidance after launch is a virtual necessity. 
In view of the accuracy needed, not to mention the expense and man-power 
involved, it would be a mistake to imagine that flights to the moon or other 
planets have become, or are ever likely to become commonplace. None the less 
the experience so far gained has resulted in what might be called a standard 
procedure consisting of -- 
1. The launch to orbital height and speed. 
2. One or more orbits of the earth. 
400 MECHANICS OF FLIGHT 
3. Rocket boost to required speed and direction for the moon. 
4. Reverse burst of power to slow down, and put into orbit round the moon. 
5. Separation of lunar module, and more reverse power to give a soft landing 
on the moon. 
6. Lift-off from the moon, and into orbit to join up again with the command 
module. 
7. Rocket boost to required speed and direction for the earth. 
8. Reverse burst to slow down and put into orbit round the earth. 
9. Re-entry, splash down and pick-up. 
These phases have been described in detail in the Press, on radio and tele- 
vision, and in numerous articles and books; our purpose here is simply to 
indicate how the principles of mechanics apply to these various phases. 
First then, the launch. 
Launching a spacecraft 
A projectile, whether it is launched for the purpose of escaping from the earth, 
or landing on the moon, or becoming a satellite, or simply travelling over the 
earth's surface to some other place, must first pass through the atmosphere. 
401 
SPACE FLIGHT 
Orbit depends on exact 
speed and direction 
and timing of boost 
Elliptical orbit going 
beyond moon 
Elliptical orbit 
hitting moon 
Path of 
moon 
Apply 
brakes 
Elliptical orbit 
short of the 
moon 
Earth 
Launch 
Lunar 
orbit 
Circular 
earth orbit 
Landing 
apply brakes 
again 
Orbit if brakes 
not applied when 
near moon 
Fig 13.12 Sending spacecraft to the moon 
Not to scale. 
The most important effect of this is that we cannot neglect air resistance, as 
we have so calmly done throughout this chapter (though with constant 
reminders). And the practical effect of air resistance is to reduce speeds, so the 
actual speeds of launching within the atmosphere must all be higher than those 
we have given. How much higher? From ground level, something of the order 
of 10 or 12 per cent, e.g. if the escape velocity is 40 250 km/h (11.134 km/s), 
the actual velocity of launch at ground level would have to be about 
45 000 km/h (12.5 km/s), and for a circular velocity of 29 000 km/h 
(8.05 km/s), say 32 000 km/h (8.9 km/s). This naturally makes accuracy more 
difficult to achieve. 
402 MECHANICS OF FLIGHT 
Fig 13B Lift off for the moon 
(By courtesy of the General Dynamics Corporation, USA) 
But there is a further difficulty. The launching speed cannot be attained at 
ground level. As has already been explained, the body on the first part of its 
flight is propelled by rockets; if it is required to reach great heights by multi- 
stage rockets. So in contrast with a shell fired from a gun there is time -- and 
distance -- in which to gather speed; and by so deciding and regulating the 
thrust of the rockets in relation to the mass of the projectile, and taking into 
account the drag due to air resistance, the acceleration can be moderated suf- 
ficiently to prevent damage to the missile itself and its mechanisms, and if 
passengers are to be carried, even to human beings. This moderation of the 
acceleration is of course an advantage, but it also makes it extremely difficult 
to calculate just what the speed, direction, and height of the vehicle will be 
when it is finally launched, i.e. when the fuel of the last launching rocket has 
been exhausted. 
No one who has thought of this problem, even in the very elementary form 
such as we have attempted to explain in this book, can be anything but 
amazed at the accuracy that has actually been achieved in the launching of 
spacecraft. 
As greater heights are reached there is less density of air, and so the drag 
decreases in spite of ever-increasing speeds. Eventually the rocket power is shut 
off, the last stage of the launching rocket is jettisoned, and the projectile, or 
spacecraft, or whatever it may be, travels on its elliptical path under the force 
of gravity until it begins to descend and again approaches the earth's atmos- 
phere. The distance it travels during this ballistic phase -- under its own steam, 
one might almost say! -- will depend on the velocity it had achieved and the 
direction in which it was travelling when the rocket power ended. It may be 
hundreds or thousands of kilometres, it could be round the earth and back 
again, or several times round; there is no fundamental difference between a 
missile, a satellite and a spacecraft, they differ only in the speed, direction and 
height of launch. 
The fact that the final launch takes place at considerable height does, at 
least, provide partial justification for our earlier neglect of air resistance when 
considering their motion. It is true that in thinking of launches at a height of 
800 km we may have been guilty of going rather far though, as explained at 
the time, it had the advantage that we really could neglect air resistance, and 
so the speeds we gave for that height were reasonably correct. Typical figures 
for an actual launch (Fig. 13.13, overleaf) are to a height of 60 km and a speed 
of 6000 km/h (1.67 km/s) at the end of the first stage, 200 km and 14 500 km/h 
(4.03 km/s) at the end of the second stage, and 500 km and 28 000 km/h 
(7.78 km/s) at the end of the third stage. The take-off is vertical, the path is 
then inclined at say 45°, then when the velocity is sufficient there is a period of 
coasting or free-wheeling between the second and third stages to the required 
height (which will become the perigee if the missile is to be a satellite) where 
the path will be horizontal, then the third stage rocket boosts the velocity to 
that required for orbit. The more this exceeds the circular velocity, the more 
distant will be the apogee. The perigee of nearly all the early satellites was less 
403 
SPACE FLIGHT 
than 800 km, but the apogee varied from just over 800 km for Sputnik 1 up to 
-- well, to the moon and beyond. 
The second stage, orbiting the earth, has already been considered in some 
detail, and there is little to add. This is the aspect of space flight of which we have 
had most experience, and there are now literally hundreds of 'bodies' of various 
shapes and sizes and masses orbiting the earth, and on a variety of orbits, and 
hundreds more that have finished their flights and have been burnt up on re- 
entering the atmosphere. There have also been several manned orbits of the 
earth, and space stations have been set up which can be permanently manned in 
'shifts' by shuttle services, put together and enlarged up there, and used for a 
variety of purposes, some peaceful -- others perhaps not so peaceful. 
So far as going to the moon is concerned the first orbits are more or less cir- 
cular and then, at the third stage, at exactly the correct part of the orbit, a 
burst of power is given to boost the speed and put the spacecraft on its journey 
to the moon. Although this journey is often represented in diagrams as a 
straight line it is in fact merely an elongated elliptical orbit designed to pass 
near the moon, so the astronauts still experience the sensation of 'weightless- 
ness'. Mid-course and other corrections, if required, can be given by short 
bursts of rocket power; since there is no air resistance the thrust required to 
make such changes is not very great. As in all elliptical orbits the speed will 
decrease as the apogee is approached, but by then the spacecraft will have 
passed the neutral point, will be attracted by the moon and will again pick up 
speed, but now new problems arise and we must consider how orbits of the 
moon differ from those round the earth. 
404 MECHANICS OF FLIGHT 
3rd stage 
Orbital height 
500 km 
200 km 
2nd stage 
Boost to 
orbital speed, 
say 28 000 km/h 
(7.78 km/s) 
Speed 
14 500 km/h 
(4.03 km/s) 
1st stage 
vertical 
Speed 
6000 km/h 
(1.67 km/s) 
A 
B 
60 km 
C 
D 
NO THRUST 
Fig 13.13 Typical flight path for launching of spacecraft 
Not to scale. 
Orbiting the moon 
In order to understand this we must consider how the moon differs from the 
earth. It is, of course, much smaller, its diameter (3490 km) being rather more 
than 1/4 that of the earth, and its mass, which is more important from the 
point of view of satellite orbits, about 1/81 that of the earth. The weight of a 
body on the moon's surface is about one sixth of its weight on earth -- if this 
puzzles the reader let him work it out, remembering that weight is the force of 
attraction which is proportional to the two masses multiplied together and 
inversely proportional to the square of the respective distances, i.e. the radii of 
the moon and the earth. The acceleration of gravity on the moon is also, of 
course, about one sixth of that on earth, i.e. just over 1.6 m/s2. But the most 
interesting difference -- and it is the result of the smaller mass of the moon and 
the lesser weight of bodies near the moon -- is that the velocities for moon 
satellites, circular velocity, escape velocity, etc., are much lower than for earth 
satellites; the escape velocity at the surface of the moon is only about 2.4 km/s, 
the circular velocity being 2.4/1.41 or 1.7 km/s. Another important point is 
that owing to the lack of air resistance it is possible for a satellite to circle the 
moon very close to its surface. 
But if the prospective satellite has been fired to meet the moon, the relative 
speed between satellite (700 km/h) and moon (3700 km/h) will be much too 
great, and so, unless the body actually hits the moon, it will merely go past it 
and escape. Thus, on first thoughts, it would seem that a body fired from the 
earth cannot become a moon satellite -- this is true so long as there is no 
propulsion in the reverse direction, in other words braking; and the moon has 
no atmosphere to act as a brake, so the only practical means of persuading a 
satellite to orbit the moon, under the influence of the moon, is to provide for 
a rocket to act as a brake on its speed as it gets into the moon's sphere of influ- 
ence (Fig. 13.12). 
This, in fact, is how the spacecraft is put into orbit round the moon -- a 
burst of power slows it down to the correct speed for the orbit required which, 
as already explained, can be much nearer the moon's surface than orbits of the 
earth (Fig. 13C, overleaf). 
Thus far there has been quite a number of flights, manned and otherwise, 
and there have also been several soft, and some not so soft, landings of craft 
conveying instruments designed to send messages back to earth; but the actual 
landing of men on the moon has not been achieved so often that it can be con- 
sidered as a matter of standard procedure. In the successful attempts so far 
made a small part of the spacecraft, the lunar module, has been detached at 
that part of the orbit which, as calculated by computer, will result in a landing 
at the desired point on the moon's surface. By a small burst of reverse power 
the lunar module is again slowed down to bring it closer to the moon, while 
the command module continues on its circular orbit. As the lunar module 
'falls' onto the moon, fortunately not so fast as it would onto the earth, but 
405 
SPACE FLIGHT 
quite fast enough to be uncomfortable, a final reverse rocket thrust is fired to 
enable the module to land gently on the surface -- owing to the lack of air no 
parachutes, or any kind of air brake, are of avail in controlling the fall (Fig. 
13D, overleaf). 
The return flight 
The moon lift-off, by another burst of rocket power, is again made just that 
much easier than from earth owing to the reduction in the mass of the space- 
ship which has thrown off the multi-stage rockets, owing too to the lesser 
force of gravity, the lack of air resistance, and the lower speed required for 
orbit; all this is just as well because the rockets that developed the tremendous 
thrust for lift-off from earth are no longer available, and by now much of the 
reserve fuel and power has been expended. Even so, a high degree of accuracy 
is again necessary to ensure that the lunar module gets into orbit close to the 
command module (though again small adjustments can be made by bursts of 
power), so that they can again be linked up into one spacecraft. Once they 
have been re-united and men, films and other souvenirs have been transferred 
to the command module, the lunar module can itself be discarded, and left to 
orbit or to hit the moon -- this time probably at speed! 
The next stage is a further and considerable boost to put what remains of 
the spacecraft out of moon orbit and on the return path to earth -- once more 
really an elongated elliptical orbit with the apogee this time near the earth. 
Although this has been described as a considerable boost, the thrust required 
is nothing like so great as was needed to start the craft on its journey to the 
moon because the neutral point is now comparatively near, and once this has 
been passed the earth's attraction will all the time be increasing, as will the 
speed of the space-ship until it reaches something of the order of 10.46 km/s 
(more than 37 000 km/h), the speed with which it started on its journey. 
Now another reverse burst is needed to slow the craft down to approxi- 
mately 7.5 km/s for a similar circular orbit, or partial orbit, and in the same 
direction too as that used after launch. 
Re-entry into the atmosphere 
On the Apollo missions, the craft re-entered the atmosphere after at least a 
partial orbit, and after discarding the larger part of what still remained of the 
spacecraft leaving only the small command module, a mere 5 tonnes of the 
3500 tonnes or more of the mass at launch. From re-entry to splashdown was 
one of the most difficult, and in some ways the crudest part of the whole pro- 
cedure. Once again extreme accuracy was needed because the craft, by final 
406 MECHANICS OF FLIGHT 
use of the rocket power still available, must enter the atmosphere, at some 400 
000 feet, through a 'window', as it is called, only 8 kilometres wide, and at an 
angle of between 5.6° and 7.2° to the top of the atmosphere -- if it entered too 
steeply it would have burned up, if too shallowly it would have bounced off 
again. Not only is the angle of entry very critical, but the craft also had to be 
manoeuvred into such a position that it encountered maximum drag (from 
drag rather than skin friction) and so maximum retardation of about 6 g. Even 
407 
SPACE FLIGHT 
Fig 13C Orbiting the moon 
(By courtesy of the Boeing Company, USA) 
Scale model of a lunar orbiter; the lunar landscape (taken by Lunar Orbiter 
1 on the far side of the moon) is authentic, and shows the sharp break 
between sunshine and shadow 
so, the speed was so high, and the skin friction so great, that the heat gener- 
ated was quite alarming, the surface of the craft was burnt and scarred, and 
the air ionised so that radio communication between the earth and the crew 
was temporarily interrupted. When denser air was reached, first a drogue 
parachute was released, followed by at least three large parachutes, and these 
reduced the velocity sufficiently for any surplus fuel to be jettisoned, and 
finally for a reasonably soft splash-down in the sea, again with reasonable 
accuracy of position. 
In view of the crudeness of this method of approach and landing it is not 
surprising that a reusable vehicle, the Space Shuttle, was developed (Fig. 13E). 
This has the same problems -- it gets hot and needs to slow down for landing. 
But using wings gives another way of controlling the trajectory and means that 
it can land on a runway. It is really a glider -- albeit an unusual one! 
Flights in space 
We could go on to discuss orbits round the sun and the possibility of flights to 
and round the various planets. It is a fascinating subject, and becomes more 
408 MECHANICS OF FLIGHT 
Fig 13D Moon landing craft 
(By courtesy of the Bell Aerospace Division of Textron Inc, USA) 
Astronaut Charles Conrad Jr in a lunar landing training vehicle during a 
simulation flight for the Apollo 12 mission 
and more so as the possibilities become practicabilities and then historical 
facts. But the principles of all such flights are the same as those we have men- 
tioned, and the author must avoid the temptation of going any further into 
space. The reader who is as fascinated with the subject as is the author -- and 
who, if he is interested in the mechanics of flight at all, is not? -- must seek 
other books, though admittedly it is not easy to find books that are at the same 
time reasonably simple and reasonably sensible. 
Sub-orbital flight -- the aeroplane -- missile -- satellite 
Have you ever realised that the 'lift' required to keep an aeroplane in the air 
depends upon the direction in which it is travelling? -- e.g. whether it is going 
with the earth or against it. In an earlier paragraph we worked out the cen- 
tripetal force on a body of mass 1 kg sitting on the earth's surface at the 
equator -- sitting still, as it seems, but in fact behaving like a stone travelling at 
1690 km/h on the end of a string of 6370 km radius. The answer didn't come 
to much -- about 0.018 N -- but the principle is of extreme importance. 
The corresponding value for an aeroplane of mass 10 190 kg is about 
400 N, still not much perhaps, but none the less an appreciable and measur- 
able quantity. It means that if the real force of gravity on the aeroplane is 
409 
SPACE FLIGHT 
Fig 13E The Space Shuttle 
(By courtesy of NASA) 
100 000 N, it would appear to weigh only 99 600 N -- in fact, of course, we 
would call this the weight, it is the force we would have to exert to lift it. 
But it is a solemn thought, though none the less a fact, that if this aeroplane 
were to fly against the direction of the earth's rotation, i.e. towards the west, 
at 1690 km/h, it would not require this centripetal force, and so would appear 
to weigh 100 000 N -- and that is the lift the wings would have to provide. If, 
on the other hand, it flew towards the east at 1690 km/h, its real speed would 
be 3380 km/h, and the centrifugal force would be, no, not 800 N but 4 400, 
i.e. 1600 N (because the centripetal force depends on the square of the vel- 
ocity), so the lift that the wings would have to provide would be 100 000 
1600 98400N. 
Similarly at a real speed of 6760 km/h (5070 km/h eastwards) the cen- 
tripetal force would be 6400 N, and the necessary lift 93 600 N. At 
12 800 km/h (11 200 km/h eastwards), the corresponding figures would be 
25600N and 74400N; and at 25600km/h, 102400N and minus 2400N! 
At approximately 29 000 km/h the centripetal force is 100 000 N and the lift 
required nil. 
What does it all mean? Well, the reader who has followed the arguments in 
this chapter will surely know what it means -- simply that the aeroplane trav- 
elling at 29 000 km/h near the earth's surface is travelling at the circular 
velocity, it doesn't need any lift from the wings, it will stay up of its own 
accord, it is a satellite. Nor when these velocities are reached does it make all 
that difference (only 1600 km/h each way) whether it travels east or west. 
What it will need is colossal thrust to equal the colossal drag, which in any 
case will cause it to frizzle up. 
But what if it flies higher -- and higher -- and higher? The drag for the same 
real speed will be less, less thrust will be needed, the circular velocity required 
for no lift conditions will be less, even the real force of gravity upon it will be 
less; it won't even create a sonic boom at ground level. 
Can you answer these? 
Now let us see what we know about this fascinating subject -- 
1. What is meant by escape velocity? What is its approximate value for the 
earth? Is it the same for the moon? 
2. Is the escape velocity the same for a horizontal launch as for a vertical 
launch? 
3. Distinguish between the perigee and the apogee in an elliptical orbit. 
4. What is the particular significance of a satellite circling the earth at about 
35 400 km from the centre of the earth? 
410 MECHANICS OF FLIGHT 
5. What is the time of circular orbit of -- 
(a) a satellite very near the earth's surface? 
(b) a satellite 1600 km from the earth's surface? 
(c) the moon? 
6. Under what conditions is the path of a satellite parabolic? hyperbolic? 
For solutions see Appendix 5. 
For numerical examples on missiles and satellites see Appendix 3. 
411 
SPACE FLIGHT 
The aerofoil sections, of which particulars are given in the following pages, 
have been chosen from among the thousands that have been tested, as being 
typical of the best that have been designed for particular purposes. 
Although the values have been taken from standard tests, they have been 
modified so as to bring them as far as possible into line with each other, and 
simplified so as to correspond with the symbols and methods used in this book. 
In thus modifying the figures the aim has been to bring out the principles even 
at the sacrifice of some degree of accuracy. For the purpose of this book nothing 
is lost by this simplification and, while it is right and proper that official results 
should be given to the accuracy with which they can be measured, the student 
should remember that they are, after all, taken from experimental figures and 
that there is a limit not only to the accuracy of such figures, but even more so 
to the various corrections that have to be applied to them. 
Unfortunately it is not possible to obtain results for all the sections at the 
same Reynolds Number, but for each the approximate Reynolds Number of 
the test has been given, and where alternative results are available those at the 
highest Reynolds' Number have been chosen. 
For reasons of security it is not possible to give test results for the most 
modern high-speed sections; but, even if they could be given, it is doubtful 
whether the tests would have been made at sufficiently high Mach Numbers 
and Reynolds Numbers to be reliable as a guide to full-scale performance. 
There is no difficulty in getting lift from bi-convex or double-wedge sections 
used at supersonic speeds, the problem is to keep down the drag. 
For the benefit of those readers who would like to sketch out the shapes of 
the various aerofoil sections, the co-ordinates of the upper and lower surfaces 
are given; the measurements are expressed as percentages of the chord, nega- 
tive values being below the chord line and positive values above it. 
The tables give values of CL and CD at various angles of attack -- from nega- 
tive angles to above the stalling angle -- but unfortunately values of CD are not 
available for aerofoils with flaps down (except for No. 8, the model of the 
Lightning). When a dash appears in the data columns it means that the figure 
Aerofoil data 
APPENDIX1 
is not available, or that for some reason it would be meaningless. Pitching 
moments are given about the leading edge, or about the quarter-chord, or 
about the aerodynamic centre; and an opportunity is given in the short ques- 
tions that follow the data for the reader to work out one from the other. 
Similarly the position of the centre of pressure can be found from other data, 
the lift/drag ratio from CL and CD, and so on. 
Most of the questions can be answered from the information given in 
Chapter 3, but the student may require a little guidance on the questions 
dealing with moment coefficients and centres of pressure, especially since the 
simplest method of reaching some of the answers is through the notation of 
differential calculus which has not been used in the text of the book. 
For instance, to solve question (c) for RAF 15 (without slot): 
In Chapter 3 when discussing the aerodynamic centre we arrived at the 
equation -- 
x/c (CM.AC CM.LE)/CL 
(1) 
or 
CM.AC CM.LE (x/c) . CL 
(2) 
By differentiating (2) with respect to CL we get the differential equation -- 
dCM.AC/dCL dCM.LE/dCL x/c 
(3) 
But, by definition, the moment coefficient about the aerodynamic centre does 
not change with the angle of attack (or with the lift coefficient), or expressed 
in mathematical terms -- 
dCM.AC/dCL 0 
Therefore 
x/c   dCM.LE/dCL 
(4) 
By drawing a graph of CM.LE against CL we can determine the slope of the curve, 
i.e. dCM.LE/dCL for any value of CL, and so for any angle of attack. Thus we can 
get x/c from (4), and substitute in (2) to get CM.AC. To solve question (c) for RAF 
15 (with slot), we must first find CM.LE from another formula in Chapter 3 -- 
CP position   CM.LE/CL 
(5) 
and then use the same method, as outlined above, to find CM.AC. The same 
method can be used to solve questions (a) and (b) on the Clark YH aerofoil; 
and for questions (b) and (c) on NACA 0009 we can start from -- 
413 
AEROFOIL DATA 
x' CM.C/4/CL as in (5) above. 
Finally it should be noted that formulae (1) and (2) are approximations based 
on the assumption that the angle of attack is small. The answers given in 
Appendix 4 have been arrived at by using these simplified formulae. 
The more refined formula for (2) is -- 
CM.AC CM.LE x/c(CLcosa CDsina) 
and the student is advised to work out one or two of the examples at the larger 
angles of attack with this formula, if only to confirm that the use of the sim- 
plified formula is justified -- at any rate for the angles of attack of normal flight. 
When differentiating the full formula, it must be remembered that cos a, CD 
and sin a all vary with CL and so the appropriate mathematical techniques 
must be used; these involve drawing graphs of cos a, CD and sin a against CL, 
in order to determine d cos a /dCL, dCD/dCL and d sin a /dCL. 
More extensive questions on aerofoils will be found in Appendix 3. 
1. RAF 15 
*1A. RAF 15 with slot 
414 MECHANICS OF FLIGHT 
Chord line 
Like Clark Y, used on many early types of aircraft. 
Figures relate to aspect ratio of 6. 
Reynolds Number of test 3.5 million; with slot 200 000. 
Slot assumed to remain open at position giving maximum lift. 
(a) What is the max. value of L/D with slot? without slot? 
(b) What is the stalling angle with slot? without slot? 
(c) What is the value of CM.AC at  4° with slot? without slot? 
(d) What is the value of CLmax/CDmin with slot? without slot? 
(e) What is the value of CL /CD (without slot) at 4° and 8°? 
32 
415 
AEROFOIL DATA 
Distance from LE, % chord Upper surface Lower surface 
0 
1.50 
1.50 
1.25 
3.14 
0.76 
2.5 
3.94 
0.50 
5 
5.00 
0.18 
7.5 
5.37 
0.02 
10 
6.09 
0.02 
15 
6.67 
0.18 
20 
6.96 
0.53 
30 
6.94 
1.02 
40 
6.63 
1.02 
50 
6.13 
0.71 
60 
5.52 
0.33 
70 
4.79 
0.06 
80 
3.91 
0.04 
90 
2.81 
0.21 
95 
2.17 
0.32 
100 
0.94 
0.94 
Angle 
CL CD CM.LE 
*CL 
*CD 
*CP, fraction 
of attack 
of chord 
 4° 
 0.14 0.014  0.036  0.27 0.120 
-- 
22° 
 0.02 0.008  0.052  0.12 0.075 
-- 
0° 
0.14 0.008  0.090  0.03 0.056 
-- 
 2° 
0.32 0.012  0.130  0.18 0.050 
0.70 
 4° 
0.46 0.020  0.160 0.33 0.050 
0.45 
6° 
0.60 0.030  0.200 0.47 0.053 
0.39 
8° 
0.76 0.044  0.240 0.62 0.060 
0.37 
10° 
0.90 0.060  0.280 0.76 0.070 
0.36 
12° 
1.04 0.070  0.310 0.90 0.080 
0.34 
14° 
1.16 0.096  0.330 1.05 0.100 
0.32 
15° 
1.22 0.110  0.340 1.12 0.110 
0.31 
16° 
1.16 0.140  0.350 1.21 0.120 
0.31 
18° 
1.02 0.210  0.384 1.36 0.148 
0.30 
20° 
0.94 0.260  0.390 1.51 0.175 
0.30 
24° 
-- 
- 
-- 
1.70 0.234 
0.30 
26° 
-- 
- 
-- 
1.76 0.270 
0.30 
28° 
-- 
- 
-- 
1.76 0.304 
0.30 
30° 
-- 
- 
-- 
1.64 0.344 
-- 
34° 
-- 
- 
-- 
1.30 0.430 
-- 
2. Clark YH 
416 MECHANICS OF FLIGHT 
Chord 
line 
Excellent American general purpose aerofoil. 
Modifications of Clark Y have been used on many types of aircraft all over the 
world; Clark YH was one of the first of these modifications. 
Figures relate to aspect ratio of 6, and standard roughness. 
Reynolds Number of test 7 million. 
Distance from LE, % chord Upper surface Lower surface 
0 
3.50 
3.50 
1.25 
5.45 
1.93 
2.5 
6.50 
1.47 
5 
7.90 
0.93 
7.5 
8.85 
0.63 
10 
9.60 
0.42 
15 
10.68 
0.15 
20 
11.36 
0.03 
30 
11.70 
0 
40 
11.40 
0 
50 
10.51 
0 
60 
9.15 
0 
70 
7.42 
0.06 
80 
5.62 
0.38 
90 
3.84 
1.02 
95 
2.93 
1.40 
100 
2.05 
1.85 
(a) What is CM.AC at 0°, 4° and 8° for this aerofoil? 
(b) Where is the aerodynamic centre of this aerofoil section? 
(c) What is the stalling angle? 
(d) What is the value of CLmax/CD min? 
(e) What is the value of CL /CD at 4° and 8°? 
3 
2 
417 
AEROFOIL DATA 
Angle of attack CL CD CP, fraction of chord CM.LE L/D 
24° 
 0.09 0.010 
-- 
 0.030  10 
22° 
 0.05 0.009 
0.74 
 0.010  5.2 
0° 
0.20 0.010 
0.40 
 0.046 19.3 
2° 
0.36 0.015 
0.32 
 0.072 23.2 
4° 
0.51 0.022 
0.295 
 0.116 23 
6° 
0.66 0.033 
0.285 
 0.150 20.6 
8° 
0.80 0.045 
0.275 
 0.184 17.7 
10° 
0.94 0.062 
0.27 
 0.220 15.2 
12° 
1.06 0.083 
0.27 
 0.244 13.3 
14° 
1.21 0.103 
0.27 
 0.276 11.8 
16° 
1.33 0.125 
0.265 
 0.320 11 
18° 
1.43 0.146 
0.265 
 0.352 9.9 
19° 
1.36 0.170 
0.275 
 0.356 8 
20° 
1.26 0.211 
0.29 
 0.354 7 
25° 
0.97 0.324 
0.33 
 0.354 
2.9 
30° 
0.81 0.430 
0.37 
 0.352 
1.9 
418 MECHANICS OF FLIGHT 
Distance from LE, % chord Upper and lower surfaces % chord 
00 
1.25 
1.42 
2.5 
1.96 
5.0 
2.67 
7.5 
3.15 
10 
3.51 
15 
4.01 
20 
4.31 
30 
4.50 
40 
4.35 
50 
3.98 
60 
3.50 
70 
2.75 
80 
1.97 
90 
1.09 
95 
0.61 
100 
0 
3. NACA 0009 
*3A. NACA 0009 with flap 
A thin symmetrical section. 
All figures relate to standard roughness. 
Reynolds Number of test 6 million. 
Position of aerodynamic centre 0.25 of chord from LE. 
*With 20 per cent split flap set at 60°. 
Chord 
line 
(a) What is the value of CM.AC (without flap)? 
Is it the same at all angles, as it should be? 
(b) What is the position of the CP (without flap) at  4°? 
(c) What is the position of the CP (with flap) at  4°? 
(d) What is the value of L/D (without flap) at 2°, 6°, 10°? 
(e) What is the stalling angle (i) without flap? (ii) with flap? 
419 
AEROFOIL DATA 
Angle of attack CL CD CM.C/4 
*CL 
*CM.C/4 
28° 
 0.88 0.022 0 
 0.45  0.200 
26° 
 0.65 0.014 0 
 0.68  0.210 
24° 
 0.45 0.011 0 
 0.90  0.216 
22° 
 0.21 0.010 0 
 1.09  0.220 
0° 
0 0.009 0 
 1.29  0.216 
 2° 
 0.21 0.010 0 
 1.38  0.218 
4° 
 0.43 0.011 0 
 1.65  0.222 
6° 
 0.64 0.014 0 
 1.78  0.225 
8° 
 0.85 0.018 0 
 1.72  0.230 
10° 
 0.90 0.021  0.002  1.58  0.275 
12° 
 0.89 0.028  0.004 -- 
- 
14° 
 0.87 0.036  0.012 -- 
- 
4. NACA 4412 
*4A. NACA 4412 with flap 
Medium thickness NACA 4-digit good all round section. 
All figures relate to standard roughness. 
Reynolds Number of test 6 million. 
Position of aerodynamic centre 0.246 of chord from LE. 
*With 20 per cent split flap set at 60°. 
420 MECHANICS OF FLIGHT 
Chord 
line 
Distance from LE, % chord Upper surface Lower surface 
00 
0 
1.25 
2.44 
 1.43 
2.5 
3.39 
 1.95 
5.0 
4.73 
 2.49 
7.5 
5.76 
 2.74 
10 
6.59 
 2.86 
15 
7.89 
 2.88 
20 
8.80 
 2.74 
25 
9.41 
 2.50 
30 
9.76 
 2.26 
40 
9.80 
 1.80 
50 
9.19 
 1.40 
60 
8.14 
 1.00 
70 
6.69 
 0.65 
80 
4.89 
 0.39 
90 
2.71 
 0.22 
95 
1.47 
 0.16 
100 
0 
0 
421 
AEROFOIL DATA 
(a) What is the value of CM.C/4 (without flap) at 0° and 8°? 
(b) Where is the CP (without flap) at these angles? 
(c) What is the value of L/D (without flap) at these angles? 
(d) What is the stalling angle (i) without flap? (ii) with 60° flap? 
(e) What is the value of CLmax/CD min (without flap)? 
Angle of attack CL CD CM.AC 
*CL 
*CM.C/4 
 8° 
 0.45 0.022  0.097  0.90  0.287 
 6° 
 0.23 0.014  0.092  1.12  0.297 
 4° 
 0.03 0.012  0.092  1.34  0.302 
 2° 
 0.20 0.010  0.092  1.56  0.305 
0° 
 0.38 0.010  0.093  1.75  0.305 
 2° 
 0.60 0.010  0.095  1.95  0.305 
4° 
 0.80 0.012  0.098  2.14  0.305 
6° 
 1.00 0.014  0.100  2.43  0.302 
8° 
 1.15 0.017  0.100  2.50  0.300 
10° 
 1.27 0.022  0.095  2.65  0.290 
12° 
 1.36 0.030  0.092  2.63  0.275 
14° 
 1.35 0.042  0.092 -- 
- 
16° 
 1.25 0.059  0.095 -- 
- 
5. NACA 23012 
Medium thickness 5-digit section that has been much used. 
Low drag; maximum camber well forward. 
All figures relate to standard roughness. 
Reynolds Number of test 6 million. 
Position of aerodynamic centre 0.241 of chord from LE. 
422 MECHANICS OF FLIGHT 
Distance from LE, % chord Upper surface Lower surface 
00 
0 
1.25 
2.67 
 1.23 
2.5 
3.61 
 1.71 
5.0 
4.91 
 2.26 
7.5 
5.80 
 2.61 
10 
6.43 
 2.92 
15 
7.19 
 3.50 
20 
7.50 
 3.97 
25 
7.60 
 4.28 
30 
7.55 
 4.46 
40 
7.14 
 4.48 
50 
6.41 
 4.17 
60 
5.47 
 3.67 
70 
4.36 
 3.00 
80 
3.08 
 2.16 
90 
1.68 
 1.23 
95 
0.92 
 0.70 
100 
0 
0 
Chord 
line 
423 
AEROFOIL DATA 
(a) What is the value of L/D for this aerofoil at 0°, 4°, 8°? 
(b) Where is the CP at these angles? 
(c) Where is the maximum thickness? 
(d) What is the stalling angle? 
(e) What is the value of CL /CD at 2°, 4° and 6°? 
3 
2 
Angle of attack CL 
CD 
CM.C/4 
CM.AC 
 8° 
 0.60 0.020  0.018  0.013 
 6° 
 0.43 0.014  0.015  0.013 
 4° 
 0.25 0.011  0.013  0.014 
 2° 
 0.08 0.010  0.013  0.016 
0° 
 0.15 0.010  0.012  0.016 
 2° 
 0.36 0.010  0.010  0.015 
4° 
 0.55 0.011  0.008  0.014 
6° 
 0.75 0.013  0.010  0.014 
8° 
 0.96 0.016  0.013  0.016 
10° 
 1.14 0.023  0.014  0.017 
12° 
 1.23 0.032  0.012  0.017 
14° 
 0.82 0.045  0.013 
-- 
16° 
 0.77 0.065  0.050 
-- 
424 MECHANICS OF FLIGHT 
6. NACA 23018 
Chord 
line 
Typical thick 5-digit section of the 230 series. 
All figures relate to standard roughness. 
Reynolds Number of test 6 million. 
Position of aerodynamic centre 0.241 of chord from LE. 
Distance from LE, % chord Upper surface Lower surface 
00 
0 
1.25 
4.09 
 1.83 
2.5 
5.29 
 2.71 
5.0 
6.92 
 3.80 
7.5 
8.01 
 4.60 
10 
8.83 
 5.22 
15 
9.86 
 6.18 
20 
10.36 
 6.86 
25 
10.56 
 7.27 
30 
10.55 
 7.47 
40 
10.04 
 7.37 
50 
9.05 
 6.81 
60 
7.75 
 5.94 
70 
6.18 
 4.82 
80 
4.40 
 3.48 
90 
2.39 
 1.94 
95 
1.32 
 1.09 
100 
0 
0 
425 
AEROFOIL DATA 
(a) What is the maximum thickness? Where is it? 
(b) What is the value of L/D at  4°, 0°, 4°, 8°, 12°? 
(c) Where is the CP on this aerofoil at 2°, 4° and 6°? 
(d) What is the stalling angle? 
(e) What is the maximum lift coefficient? 
Angle of attack CL 
CD 
CM.C/4 
CM.AC 
 8° 
 0.62 0.016  0.018  0.008 
 6° 
 0.47 0.014  0.010  0.007 
 4° 
 0.28 0.012  0.008  0.007 
 2° 
 0.09 0.011  0.005  0.007 
0° 
 0.12 0.010  0.002  0.007 
 2° 
 0.33 0.011  0.001  0.007 
4° 
 0.53 0.012 
0 
 0.007 
6° 
 0.72 0.014  0.002  0.007 
8° 
 0.90 0.016  0.003  0.007 
10° 
 1.01 0.020  0.004  0.008 
12° 
 1.06 0.028  0.005  0.008 
14° 
 0.75 0.040  0.002 
-- 
16° 
 0.68 0.060  0.020 
-- 
7. NACA 651--212 
*7A. NACA 651--212 with flap 
Typical of the NACA 6 series; medium thickness. 
All figures relate to standard roughness. 
Reynolds Number of test 6 million. 
Position of aerodynamic centre 0.259 of chord from LE. 
*With 20 per cent split flap set at 60°. 
426 MECHANICS OF FLIGHT 
Distance from LE, % chord Upper surface Lower surface 
00 
0 
0.5 
0.970 
 0.870 
0.75 
1.176 
 1.036 
1.25 
1.491 
 1.277 
2.50 
2.058 
 1.686 
5.00 
2.919 
 2.287 
7.5 
3.593 
 2.745 
10 
4.162 
 3.128 
15 
5.073 
 3.727 
20 
5.770 
 4.178 
25 
6.300 
 4.510 
30 
6.687 
 4.743 
35 
6.942 
 4.882 
40 
7.068 
 4.926 
45 
7.044 
 4.854 
50 
6.860 
 4.654 
55 
6.507 
 4.317 
60 
6.014 
 3.872 
65 
5.411 
 3.351 
70 
4.715 
 2.771 
75 
3.954 
 2.164 
80 
3.140 
 1.548 
85 
2.302 
 0.956 
90 
1.463 
 0.429 
95 
0.672 
 0.040 
100 
0 
0 
Chord 
line 
427 
AEROFOIL DATA 
Angle of attack CL 
CD 
CM.C/4 
*CL 
*CM.C/4 
 8° 
 0.68 0.020  0.025  0.58  0.223 
 6° 
 0.50 0.015  0.026  0.80  0.230 
 4° 
 0.33 0.013  0.030  1.03  0.240 
 2° 
 0.10 0.010  0.033  1.25  0.250 
0° 
 0.12 0.009  0.035  1.45  0.260 
 2° 
 0.35 0.010  0.037  1.63  0.265 
4° 
 0.55 0.011  0.038  1.80  0.267 
6° 
 0.80 0.015  0.039  1.87  0.264 
8° 
 0.95 0.023  0.040  1.83  0.260 
10° 
 1.07 0.035  0.040  1.70  0.255 
12° 
 1.06 0.050  0.038  1.48  0.380 
14° 
 1.01 
-- 
 0.035 
-- 
- 
(a) What is CM.AC? Is it the same at all angles, as it should be? 
(b) Where is the maximum thickness? 
(c) What is the stalling angle (i) without flap? (ii) with 60° flap? 
(d) What is the maximum value of L/D? 
(e) What is the value of CLmax/CDmin (without flap)? 
428 MECHANICS OF FLIGHT 
8. English Electric ASN/P1/3 
*8A. English Electric ASN/P1/3 with flap 
This is the symmetrical aerofoil section used on the BAC Mach 2 Lightning. 
The wing was tapered and the ordinates relate to a section at 38.5 per cent of 
semi-span. 
Reynolds Number of test 1.5 million (based on mean chord). 
The values of coefficients refer to a complete model of the aircraft, not to the 
wing section alone. 
The Lightning was a mid-wing monoplane with 60° sweepback on leading 
edge (see Fig. 11B). 
*Model with approx 25 per cent plain flaps set at 50°. 
Chord 
line 
429 
AEROFOIL DATA 
Distance from LE, % chord Upper and lower surfaces % chord 
00 
0.25 
0.426 
0.75 
0.706 
1.25 
0.875 
2.50 
1.175 
5.00 
1.530 
10 
1.941 
15 
2.183 
20 
2.435 
25 
2.612 
30 
2.782 
35 
2.904 
40 
2.944 
45 
2.970 
50 
2.942 
55 
2.855 
60 
2.703 
65 
2.502 
70 
2.237 
75 
1.921 
80 
1.564 
85 
1.183 
90 
0.797 
95 
0.414 
100 
0.032 
The values of CM are related to a point at 0.405 of mean chord. The position 
of the aerodynamic centre 0.405 dCM/dCL. The figures for the Lightning 
were given by courtesy of the former British Aircraft Corporation, Preston. 
(a) What is the thickness/chord ratio of this aerofoil? 
(b) Where is the maximum thickness? 
(c) What is the stalling angle of the aircraft model: (i) with flaps up? (ii) 
with flaps down? 
(d) What are the values of L/D of the model at 4°, 12° and 20°: (i) with 
flaps up? (ii) with flaps down? 
(e) What are the positions of the aerodynamic centre of the clean aircraft at 
4°, 12° and 20°? 
(Note: The answers involve the drawing of the curve of CM against CL and 
measuring the slopes of this curve at the specific angles.) 
430 MECHANICS OF FLIGHT 
Data for BAC Lightning model -- clean aircraft 
Angle of attack CL 
CD 
CM 
0° 
0 
0.020  0.017 
2° 
0.08 0.020  0.013 
4° 
0.17 0.030  0.008 
6° 
0.27 0.040  0.006 
8° 
0.38 0.050  0.005 
10° 
0.50 0.075  0.010 
12° 
0.61 0.105  0.016 
14° 
0.71 0.140  0.026 
16° 
0.81 0.180  0.040 
18° 
0.91 0.225  0.055 
20° 
1.00 0.275  0.070 
22° 
1.09 0.335  0.088 
24° 
1.17 0.405  0.108 
26° 
1.22 0.480  0.124 
28° 
1.26 0.560  0.132 
30° 
1.27 0.650  0.140 
Data for BAC Lightning model -- flaps at 50° 
Angle of attack CL 
CD 
CM 
0° 
0.17 0.07  0.072 
2° 
0.27 0.07  0.068 
4° 
0.37 0.08  0.062 
6° 
0.47 0.09  0.060 
8° 
0.57 0.11  0.053 
10° 
0.67 0.13  0.040 
12° 
0.78 0.16  0.032 
14° 
0.88 0.20  0.025 
16° 
0.98 0.25  0.015 
18° 
1.07 0.31  0.005 
20° 
1.15 0.37  0.013 
22° 
1.22 0.43  0.020 
24° 
1.27 0.50  0.037 
26° 
1.27 0.55  0.045 
28° 
1.22 0.59  0.074 
30° 
1.16 0.63  0.074 
This appendix is an amplification of a short note given about scale effect in 
Chapter 2. From the earliest days of the science of flight, even before any aero- 
plane had actually flown, people experimented with small models. The 
problem is how do we relate the behaviour of the model and the aerodynamic 
forces that are exerted on it to a full-size aircraft? We know that if we can 
measure, say, the lift force on a small model, we can work out its lift coeffi- 
cient using L rv2SCL , and from this we can calculate the lift on the full-size 
aircraft at any speed. However, we do not always get quite the correct answer, 
and sometimes we get an answer that is completely wrong. Is there something 
else that we should be doing? The clue to this was found by Osborne Reynolds 
some 150 years ago. Reynolds was not interested in aircraft aerodynamics but 
in the flow of liquids. In particular, he was interested in the conditions that 
determined whether the flow of water in a pipe was smooth and layered 
(laminar), which is normally associated with low-speed flow, or turbulent, 
which is associated with higher-speed flow. What he discovered was that the 
speed of flow at which the change or transition occurred depended on the 
value of the quantity: 
which is now called a Reynolds Number. 
In this quantity, r is the density of the fluid (water in his case) 
v is the flow speed 
is the diameter of the pipe 
m is the viscosity of the fluid 
For the problem of flow in pipes it was found that the transition from one type 
of flow to the other occurred at a critical value of around 2300. It was discov- 
ered that this critical value held regardless of the size of the pipe and what type 
of fluid was used; it even works for gases. So what does the flow of water have 
to do with model testing of aircraft? Well, we find that if we test our model at 
rv 
m 
12 
Scale effect and 
Reynolds Number 
APPENDIX2 
the same Reynolds Number as the full scale aircraft, then it will behave in the 
same way. For example its wing will stall at exactly the same angle of attack, 
and full-scale forces calculated using the lift and drag coefficients will be 
correct. Of course for aircraft there is no pipe diameter involved, so for the 
quantity  , we have to use some other characteristic length. This leads to some 
confusion, because different characteristic lengths have to be used for different 
types of model. For a wing section, the wing chord is normally used as the 
characteristic length, but a missile may not have a wing, so in this case we 
would probably use the overall missile length. It does not actually matter 
which length we use, as long as we are consistent between model and full-size. 
It is also important to say exactly what dimension one is using. All too often 
Reynolds Number values are quoted without this important piece of infor- 
mation. For the testing of a low-speed aircraft then, apparently, all we have to 
do is to ensure that the Reynolds Number of the model test is the same as that 
of the flight conditions that we are going to simulate. For example, consider 
an aircraft as below, flying at sea level 
Flight speed v 30 m/s 
Wingchord 2m 
If we want to test a 1/10th scale model under the same sea level conditions, 
then the Reynolds Numbers must be the same so the speed v that we must test 
the model at is found from 
After cancelling out the density and viscosity terms (which for this special case 
are the same for both model and full scale) we find that the required model test 
speed v is 300 m/s. This result is both surprising and unfortunate. The model 
actually needs to fly ten times faster than the real aircraft in order to correctly 
simulate the flight conditions. This is normally impractical, especially for 
faster aircraft, because the model would have to be flying at speeds where 
compressibility would totally change the flow. 
We do not, of course, normally fly our models around the room; we put 
them in a wind tunnel and let the air flow past them. However, this does not 
immediately solve the problem that the relative air flow speed past a 1/nth 
scale model would need to be n times as fast as the full-scale aircraft. In the 
example above, this would mean a tunnel speed of 300 m/s, which would not 
only require a very strong tunnel and a huge amount of power to drive it, but 
would also mean that the effects of compressibility would be important. One 
solution is to make the tunnel very strong indeed and raise the air pressure 
inside. This has the effect of increasing the density, and, as will be seen from 
the Reynolds Number expression above, if the density is raised, then the speed 
can be lowered in the same proportion. Fortunately, modern large aircraft 
r30 2 
m 
rv 2/10 
m 
432 MECHANICS OF FLIGHT 
mostly cruise at very high altitude, where the density is low, so this also 
reduces the speed required for the model. Unfortunately, large compressed air 
wind tunnels are extremely expensive both to build and to run, and for this 
reason there are very few of them in the world; indeed the number is if any- 
thing reducing now. Making the tunnel smaller does not help, because the 
smaller the model, the greater the speed required. One way to overcome the 
problem of tunnel size is to test small critical parts of aircraft such as a wing 
section at large scale in a relatively small compressed air tunnel. 
Compressed air tunnels do not unfortunately solve all the problems of sim- 
ilarity because nowadays all but light and a few specialist aircraft need to fly 
in the transonic region at speeds approaching the speed of sound, and fast 
military aircraft have to fly supersonically. Under these conditions, getting the 
Reynolds Number correct is less important than getting the right condition for 
similarity of compressibility effects. The latter entails getting the same Mach 
Number on the model and the full-scale aircraft. Mach Number is given 
simply by the ratio (speed/speed of sound). The speed of sound depends only 
on the square root of the absolute temperature of the air. The difference 
between the sea level absolute temperature on a really hot day and the tem- 
perature in the upper atmosphere is only a ratio of about 2:3, so broadly 
speaking, for compressible flows, matching of Mach Numbers requires us to 
run the tunnel air at a speed that is quite similar to that of the full-size aircraft. 
Notice that the size of the model does not come into this. 
Trying to match both the Mach Numbers and the Reynolds numbers at the 
same time is very difficult. The most practical solution has been the adoption 
of the cryogenic tunnel, which is a variation of the compressed air tunnel, in 
which the air is cooled by injecting liquid nitrogen. Cooling affects the speed 
of sound (and hence the Mach Number), the density and the viscosity coeffi- 
cient (and hence the Reynolds Number). By suitably juggling the pressure, 
temperature and speed, it is possible to get a simultaneous match for both the 
Reynolds and Mach numbers. Such tunnels are extremely expensive to con- 
struct and to run, and only a few exist in the entire world. 
Needless to say, not all wind tunnel testing is carried out in such facilities. 
For practical purposes, we can still make reasonably accurate predictions by 
use of compromises. It is fortunate that matching the Reynolds Numbers is 
most important for very low-speed flight, so we can still make useful measure- 
ments in low-speed (about 30 to 100 m/s) wind tunnels. 
The mismatch in Reynolds Number is particularly significant when it comes 
to the behaviour of the boundary layers. The position of transition from 
laminar to turbulent flow and the point at which the flow separates is strongly 
related to the value of the Reynolds Number, so we can expect reasonably good 
results if we are testing in situations where these two factors are not likely to 
be critical. However, when investigating stall behaviour, for example, we may 
need to use a large higher speed tunnel or rely more on full-scale testing. 
In high flight speeds it is the matching of Mach Numbers that is important. 
Thus for high-speed flight, we use specially designed transonic or supersonic 
433 
SCALE EFFECT AND REYNOLDS NUMBER 
tunnels where we can match the Mach Numbers, but normally have to ignore 
the Reynolds Number. The expensive cryogenic tunnels are used only where 
highly accurate work is required on a major airliner or military aircraft. All of 
this might seem a little baffling, and indeed it requires a great deal of experi- 
ence and knowledge to achieve really reliable wind tunnel results. 
I am frequently asked what is the speed at which you should test a model 
to simulate a given full-scale speed. The answer, as you may see from the 
above, is that it is the speed at which the Reynolds and Mach numbers are 
both simultaneously the same as they would be if full scale. As we have also 
seen above, though, this is not normally practical unless you have a very large 
research budget. In practice, the answer normally is to test as fast as your 
tunnel will allow. The precise speed of the test is not really important, because 
we can determine the full-scale lift and drag etc. by using the relationships Ò 
rv2SCL and D rv2SCD. The wind-tunnel data allow us to work out the 
lift and drag coefficients, and these can then be used to determine the values 
of lift and drag that would be obtained at full-scale size air density and speed. 
We just have to hope that the effects of Reynolds Numbers, are small. 
Apart from the problems of trying to match Reynolds and Mach numbers, 
wind tunnels have some other drawbacks. These mainly arise from the fact 
that the air is constrained by the tunnel walls and cannot behave exactly as it 
would if there were no boundary. For example, the model forms partial 
blockage in the tunnel and thus it causes the flow to speed up in its proximity, 
thereby giving misleadingly high loads. Explaining the details of these effects 
is well beyond the scope of this book. What is normally done, however, is that 
some theoretically based corrections have to be applied. Whole books and 
many scientific papers have been written in the subject of wind tunnel correc- 
tions, and the science is still developing. 
With all the difficulties and expense involved in wind tunnel testing it is not 
surprising that people have sought to find ways around it. Increasing use is 
now being made of computer modelling or computational fluid dynamics 
(CFD). After many years of development, CFD can now provide accurate pre- 
dictions for many aspects of aircraft aerodynamics, but it is not such a cheap 
or quick solution as might have been hoped for. Also, CFD is not yet reliable 
for situations where important flow separations occur; it can be quite poor at 
predicting the drag forces from areas and components where the flow is not 
streamlined. At the time of writing, both wind tunnel testing and CFD are 
used, and there is no indication that wind tunnels are about to disappear. 
Experience shows that there are situations, such as in the behaviour of 
boundary layers, where wind tunnels work best, and others where computa- 
tional methods are more appropriate. Finally, it should be mentioned that with 
modern telemetry and remote guidance systems it is possible to do some useful 
testing using flying scale models. Apart from the use of radio controlled 
models, there is a whole new area of testing which involves making piloted 
scale models, usually with relatively cheap composite material airframes. 
12 
12 
434 MECHANICS OF FLIGHT 
The student may be surprised to find that in some of the examples below, we 
have used unfamiliar units such as knots for air speed and feet for altitude. 
This is quite deliberate, because flying is an international activity, and it is 
standard practice to use knots and feet for performance calculations. Anyone 
therefore who is thinking of making a career in aeronautics, whether as a pilot, 
an engineer, a technician or working in the area of flight management will have 
to get used to using these units and develop a feel for the magnitudes involved. 
Note that it is usually safer to convert the values to SI units before making cal- 
culations as these units are much simpler to use. Do not however forget to 
convert the answers back where appropriate. For convenience, we have given 
the necessary conversion factors below. You will soon get used to converting 
knots to m/s. You may not need to convert the feet to metres in all cases, 
because often all you need to know is what the relative density is at the given 
height. This can be found from Fig. 2.2 which gives the relative density against 
height, both in metres and feet. 
In Europe, it is now common practice to use SI units for aerodynamic 
analysis and design, and for general scientific work, so questions of this type 
are in SI units. 
It is recognised that in order to solve some of the examples, assumptions 
must be made which can hardly be justified in practice, and that these assump- 
tions may have an appreciable effect on the answers. However, the benefit of 
solving these problems lies not in the numerical answers but in the consider- 
ations involved in obtaining them. 
Unless otherwise specified, the following values should be used -- 
Density of water 1000 kg/m3 
Specific gravity of mercury 13.6 
Specific gravity of methylated spirit 0.78 
International nautical mile 1852 m, or approx 6076 ft 
1 knot 0.514 m/s 
1ft 0.3048m 
Numerical 
questions 
APPENDIX3 
Radius of earth 6370 km 
Diameter of the moon 3490 km 
Distance of the moon from the earth 385 000 km 
Aerofoil data as given in Appendix 1 
CD for flat plate at right angles 1.2 
cylinder 0.6 
streamline shape 0.06 
pitot tube 1.00 
Take the maximum length in the direction of motion for the length L in 
the Reynolds Number formula. 
At standard sea-level conditions -- 
Acceleration of gravity 9.81 m/s2 
Atmospheric pressure 101.3 kN/m2, or 1013 mb, or 760 mmHg 
Density of air 1.225 kg/m3 at 1013 mb and 288°K 
Speed of sound 340 m/s 661 knots 1225 km/h 
Dynamic viscosity of air (m) 17.894 1026 kg/ms 
For low altitudes one millibar change in pressure is equivalent to 30 
feet change in altitude. 
International standard atmosphere as in Fig. 2.2. 
Chapter 1. Mechanics 
1. A car is travelling along a road at 50 km/h. If it accelerates uniformly at 
1.5 m/s2 -- 
(a) What speed will it reach in 12 s? 
(b) How long will it take to reach 150 km/h? 
2. A train starts from rest with a uniform acceleration and attains a speed 
of110km/hin 2 min. Find-- 
(a) the acceleration; 
(b) the distance travelled in the first minute; 
(c) the distance travelled in the two minutes. 
3. If a motorcycle increases its speed by 5 km/h every second, find -- 
(a) the acceleration in m/s2; 
(b) the time taken to cover 0.5 km from rest. 
4. During its take-off run, a light aircraft accelerates at 1.5 m/s2. If it starts 
from rest and takes 20 s to become airborne, what is its take-off speed 
and what length of ground run is required? 
436 MECHANICS OF FLIGHT 
5. A boy on a bicycle is going downhill at 16 km/h. If his brakes fail and 
he accelerates at 0.3 m/s2, what speed will he attain if the hill is 400 m 
long? 
6. Assuming that the maximum deceleration of a car when full braking is 
applied is 0.8 g, find the length of run required to pull up from (a) 50 
km/h, (b) 100 km/h. 
7. A rifle bullet is fired vertically upwards with a muzzle velocity of 700 
m/s. Assuming no air resistance, what height will it reach? and how long 
will it take to reach the ground again? 
8. The landing speed of a certain aircraft is 90 knots. If the maximum poss- 
ible deceleration with full braking is 2 m/s2, what length of landing run 
will be required? 
9. A 7000 kg aeroplane touches down at 100 knots and is brought to rest, 
the average resistance to motion due to brakes and aerodynamic drag 
being 6.867 kN. To reduce the landing run by 500 m a tail parachute is 
fitted. If the additional equipment increases the total mass of the aircraft 
by 200 kg and the landing speed by 5 knots, what additional average 
drag must the parachute supply? 
10. An athlete runs 100 m in 11 seconds. Assuming that he accelerates uni- 
formly for 25 m and then runs the remaining 75 m at constant velocity, 
what is his velocity at the 100 m mark? 
11. An aircraft flying straight and level at a speed of 300 knots and at a 
height of 8000 m above ground level drops a bomb. Neglecting the 
effects of air resistance, with what speed will the bomb strike the 
ground? (Remember that the final velocity will have to be found by 
compounding the vertical and horizontal velocities.) 
12. Two masses of 10 kg each are attached to the ends of a rope, and the 
rope is hung over a frictionless pulley. What is the tension in the rope? 
13. One of the masses in Q12 is replaced by a 15 kg mass. What will be the 
tension in the rope when the system is released? 
14. What force is necessary to accelerate a 133 kg shell from rest to a vel- 
ocity of 600 m/s in a distance of 3.5 m? 
15. What thrust is necessary to accelerate an aircraft of 5900 kg mass from 
rest to a speed of 90 knots in a distance of 750 m? 
16. Calculate the thrust required to accelerate a rocket of 1 tonne mass from 
rest vertically upwards to a speed of 10 km/s in 10 s (neglect air resist- 
ance). 
17. A train of 250 tonnes mass is moving at 100 km/h. What retarding force 
will be required to bring it to rest in 15 seconds? 
437 
NUMERICAL QUESTIONS 
18. A 76 kg man is standing on a weighing machine which is on the floor of 
a lift. What will the weighing machine record when -- 
(a) the lift is ascending with velocity increasing at 0.6 m/s2? 
(b) the lift is ascending with velocity decreasing at 0.6 m/s2? 
(c) the lift is descending at a constant velocity of 1.2 m/s? 
19. An engine of 50 tonnes mass is coupled to a train of 400 tonnes mass. What 
pull in the coupling will be required to accelerate the train up a gradient of 1 
in 100 from rest to 50 km/h in 2 min if the frictional resistance is 70 N per 
tonne? 
20. An aircraft of 5000 kg mass is diving vertically downwards at a speed of 
500 knots. The pilot operates the dive brakes at a height of 10 000 m 
and reduces the speed to 325 knots at 7000 m. If the average air resist- 
ance of the remainder of the aircraft during the deceleration is 15 kN, 
what average force must be exerted by the dive brakes? (Assume that the 
engine is throttled back and is not producing any thrust.) 
21. A 1 tonne truck is pulled on a level track by a force of 245 N in excess 
of the frictional resistance. How far will it travel from rest in 30 
seconds? 
22. A horizontal jet of water from a nozzle 50 mm in diameter strikes a ver- 
tical wall. If the water is diverted at right angles and none splashes back, 
what force is exerted on the wall when the speed of the jet is 6 m/s? 
23. A truck is standing on an incline of 1 in 80. If the frictional resistance is 
50 N per tonne, how far will it travel in 15 s if released from rest? 
24. If the air resistance of a 500 kg bomb is equal to v2/18 N, where v is the 
velocity in m/s, what is the terminal velocity of the bomb? 
25. An aircraft of 4000 kg mass has a take-off speed of 60 knots and a take- 
off run of 300 m in conditions of no wind. If the thrust delivered by the 
engine is 15 000 N, and the frictional resistance is 1000 N, what is the 
average aerodynamic resistance during the take-off? 
26. What force is necessary to stop a 500 kg car in 10 m from a speed of 50 km/h? 
27. A solid 1 kg shot is fired from a barrel of 100 kg mass with a muzzle vel- 
ocity of 850 m/s. If the barrel is free to recoil against a resistance of 5 
kN, how far will the barrel move back when the shot is fired? 
28. A fighter aircraft of 5000 kg mass is fitted with four cannon each of 
which fires 600 rounds per minute with a muzzle velocity of 900 m/s. If 
each shot has a mass of 110 g, and if all the recoil is taken by the air- 
craft, find the loss in speed that the aircraft would experience in a 5 
second burst of fire. 
438 MECHANICS OF FLIGHT 
29. A 9000 kg aircraft is flying straight and level at 300 knots; what thrust 
is necessary to accelerate it to 450 knots in half a minute if the average 
air resistance of the aircraft between these speeds is 15 kN? 
30. A rifle of 4 kg mass fires a 30 g bullet with a muzzle velocity of 750 m/s. 
Find the force a rifleman must exert on the butt of the rifle to limit the 
recoil to 40 mm. 
31. An aircraft is fitted with brakes capable of exerting a force of 10 kN, and 
reversible pitch propellers capable of producing a backward thrust of 25 
kN. If the aircraft has a mass of 10 000 kg and a landing speed of 110 
knots, find the minimum length of runway required for the landing run. 
(Neglect the effect of air resistance which will also help to decelerate the 
aircraft.) 
32. An aircraft carrier is steaming at 20 knots against a head wind of 30 knots. 
An aircraft of 9000 kg mass lands on the deck with an air speed of 100 
knots; if the arrester gear must be sufficiently powerful to stop the aircraft 
in a distance of 25 m in these conditions, without any aid from the brakes 
or air resistance, find the retarding force that the gear must exert. 
33. A 5000 kg aircraft touches down on the deck of an aircraft carrier with 
an air speed of 90 knots. If the carrier is heading into wind at 20 knots, 
and the wind speed is 12 knots, what kinetic energy must be destroyed 
by the action of the arrester gear in bringing the aircraft to rest on the 
deck? If the average resistance exerted by the arrester gear is 55 kN, 
how far does the aircraft roll along the deck before coming to rest? 
34. A propeller 3 m in diameter revolves at 2250 rpm. Find the angular vel- 
ocity and the linear speed of the propeller tip. 
35. The piston of an aircraft engine has a stroke of 150 mm and the engine 
runs at 3000 rpm. Find the angular velocity of the crankshaft and the 
average speed of the piston. 
36. Find the acceleration of the propeller tip in Q34. 
37. Find the acceleration of the crankpins in the engine in Q35. 
38. A stone of mass 1 kg is whirled in a horizontal circle making 60 rpm at 
the end of a cord 1 m long; what is the pull in the string? If it is whirled 
in a vertical circle, what is the pull in the string (a) when the stone is at 
the top? (b) when the stone is at the bottom? 
39. A mass of 50 kg travelling at 7.905 km/s maintains a circular path of 
radius 6370 km. What is its acceleration towards the centre? 
40. A sphere of mass 500 kg is travelling on a circular path of 12 800 km 
radius with an acceleration of 2.45 m/s2 towards the centre. How long 
does it take to complete one full circle? 
439 
NUMERICAL QUESTIONS 
41. At what speed (in km/h) is a bank angle of 45° required for an aeroplane 
toturnonaradiusof60m? 
42. An aeroplane has a mass of 1500 kg. It is turning on a horizontal circle 
of radius 100 m at an air speed of 80 knots. Calculate -- 
(a) the centripetal force exerted by the air on the aircraft, 
(b) the correct angle of bank, 
(c) the total lift normal to the wings. 
43. Find the work required to lift a mass of 5 tonnes to a height of 30 m. If 
this is done in 2 minutes, what power is being used? 
44. Find the power required to propel a 3000 kg aircraft through the air at 
a speed of 175 knots if the air resistance is 3924 N. 
45. Find the power required to propel the same aircraft at 350 knots when 
the air resistance is 14.715 kN. 
46. Acar ofmass750kgcan climbagradient of1in12in topgear at40 
km/h. If the frictional resistance is 100 N per tonne, find the power 
developed by the engine in these conditions. 
47. A projectile of mass 1 kg is fired from a gun with a muzzle velocity of 
850 m/s. What is its kinetic energy? What will be its velocity when the 
kinetic energy has fallen to 90.3125 kJ? 
48. The jet velocity of a certain gas turbine is 500 m/s when the engine is sta- 
tionary on the ground; if the mass flow of jet gases is 15 kg/s, find the 
kinetic energy wasted to the atmosphere every minute. 
49. A block of wood of mass 75 kg slides down a frictionless slope on to a 
rough level surface. The slope is 1 in 10 and 10 m long. If the frictional 
resistance on the level surface is 0.981 N/kg, how far will the block 
travel along the level surface? 
Chapter 2. Air and airflow -- subsonic speeds 
50. At a certain height the barometric pressure is 830 mb and the tempera- 
ture 227 K. Find the density of air at this height. 
51. If one fifth of the air is oxygen, what will be the mass of oxygen in 1 m3 
of air at a temperature of  33°C and a pressure of 40 kN/m2? 
52. Whatisthetotalmassofairinaroom12mlong,8mwideand4m 
high in standard sea-level conditions? 
440 MECHANICS OF FLIGHT 
53. What would be the total mass of air in the room mentioned in Q52 if 
the temperature rose from 15°C to 25°C and the pressure dropped from 
1013 m/s to 979 m/s of mercury? (Assume that the room is not air-tight, 
and that therefore the air is free to enter or leave the room.) 
54. From Fig. 2.2 read the temperature, pressure and density of the air at 
sea-level. Taking these values and the corresponding values of tempera- 
ture and pressure at (a) 10 000 ft and (b) 10 000 m, calculate the density 
at these two heights on the assumption that Boyle's Law and Charles' 
Law are true for air. Compare the calculated values with the correspon- 
ding values obtained from the relative density and density respectively 
given for the International Standard Atmosphere in Fig. 2.2. 
55. During a gliding competition a barograph was installed in a glider to 
measure the altitude reached. On landing, the minimum pressure 
recorded by the barograph was 472 mb. Draw a graph of pressure 
against altitude from the values given in Fig. 2.2, and estimate the height 
reached by the competitor. 
56. An aircraft is standing on an airfield 220 ft above sea-level on a day 
when the barometric pressure at ground level is 1004 mb. If the pilot 
sets the altimeter to read 220 ft on this day, what will it read if the baro- 
metric pressure drops to 992 mb? 
57. An aircraft sets off from airfield A (126 ft above sea-level) where the 
ground pressure is 1010 mb and flies to B (762 foot above sea-level) 
where the ground pressure is 985 mb. If the pilot sets his alimeter (incor- 
rectly) at 26 ft at A, what will it read when he lands at B? 
58. The volume of the pressurised compartment of a jet aircraft is 336 m3. 
If the pressurisation system has to maintain a temperature of 17°C and 
a cabin altitude of 10 000 ft when the aircraft is flying at 40 000 ft with 
a complete change of air every minute, calculate the mass of air per 
second which must be delivered to the pressurised compartment. 
59. A light aircraft has a landing speed of 70 knots. A wind of 25 knots is 
blowing over the airfield. What is the ground speed of the aircraft when 
it touches down -- 
(a) directly into wind? 
(b) at an angle of 30° to the wind? 
(c) at an angle of 60° to the wind? 
(d) directly down-wind? 
60. A and B are two places 400 nautical miles apart. Find the total time 
taken by an aircraft flying at an air speed of 250 knots to fly from A to 
BandbacktoA-- 
(a) if there is no wind, 
441 
NUMERICAL QUESTIONS 
(b) if the wind is blowing at 30 knots from A towards B, 
(c) if the wind is blowing at 30 knots at right angles to the line joining 
AandB. 
61. A pilot must reach a destination 450 nautical miles away in one hour. 
He sets off at an air speed of 455 knots and after half an hour finds that 
he has covered only 212 nautical miles. Assuming constant wind vel- 
ocity, at what air speed must he fly for the remaining half hour to reach 
his destination on time? 
62. If the pilot in Q61 flew at an air speed of 465 knots for the first half 
hour, what air speed would be necessary for the remaining time to com- 
plete the journey in the hour? 
63. An aircraft is taking part in a square search involving flying over the 
ground in the form of a square of 25 nautical miles side. If the aircraft 
cruises at 120 knots air speed, and there is a wind of 30 knots down one 
of the sides of the square, calculate the time of flight for each of the four 
sides. 
64. A flat plate of area 0.25 m2 is placed in a 30.8 m/s airstream at right 
angles to the direction of the airflow. Calculate the air resistance of the 
plate in these conditions. 
65. What would be the resistance of the flat plate of Q64 at 61.6 m/s. 
66. What will be the resistance of a sphere of radius 75 mm moving through 
air at 30.8 m/s? (CD 0.55) 
67. What would be the resistance of the same sphere moving at the same 
speed through water? 
68. A 1/8th scale model of a streamlined body, when tested in a water tank 
at 5 m/s, had a resistance of 0.6 N. Neglecting any 'scale effect', what 
would be the resistance of the full-size body at 75 m/s in air? 
69. A wind of 7.7 m/s causes a pressure of 50 N/m2 on a flat plate at right 
angles to it. What wind velocity would produce a total force of 1 kN on 
3 m2 of a similar plate? 
70. Of two exactly similar parts of an aeroplane, one is situated in the slip- 
stream from the propeller and the other is outside the slipstream. If the 
velocity of the slipstream is 1.4 times the velocity of the aeroplane and 
if the resistance of the part outside the slipstream is 100 N, what will be 
the resistance of the corresponding part within the slipstream? 
71. The air resistance of the fuselage of an aircraft is 13.35 kN at ground 
level at an air speed of 90 m/s. What will be the resistance of this fuse- 
lage at a true air speed of 113.1 m/s at 20 000 ft, assuming that the 
density of air at this height is half the value at ground level? 
442 MECHANICS OF FLIGHT 
72. If the undercarriage of an aircraft has a frontal area of 0.45 m2, and a 
resistance of 475 N at a speed of 42.3 m/s, what is the value of the drag 
coefficient? 
73. A rough egg-shaped body with a circular cross-section 75 mm in diam- 
eter is tested in a wind tunnel at 51.4 m/s and the air resistance is found 
to be 1.8 N. What is the value of the drag coefficient? 
74. The drag of a loop aerial on an aircraft was found to be 400 N at a 
speed of 113.1 m/s. In order to reduce this, a fairing of 0.1 m2 cross- 
section and drag coefficient of 0.11 was fitted to the aerial. By how 
much did this reduce the drag at this speed? 
75. A 1/5th scale model of an aeroplane is tested in a wind tunnel at a speed 
of 25 m/s, and the drag is found to be 56 N. What will be the drag of 
the full-size machine at 61.7 m/s? (Neglect any 'scale effect', and assume 
that the density of the air is the same in each case.) 
76. A 1/10th scale model of an aeroplane is tested in a wind tunnel, and the 
air resistance is 65 N at a speed of 100 m/s. What would be the resist- 
ance of an 1/8th scale model at 130 m/s? (Assume that the air density is 
the same for both tests.) 
77. A 1/10th scale model of a hull of a flying boat is tested in a water tank 
and has a resistance of 135 N at a speed of 12 m/s. What would be the 
resistance of the full-size hull in water at a speed of 23.1 m/s? 
78. A streamlined shape with a cross-sectional area of 0.01 m2 is tested in a 
compressed air tunnel at a speed of 34 m/s and a pressure of 25 atmos- 
pheres. If the resistance is 18 N, what is the value of the drag coefficient? 
79. What would be the resistance of the same body in water at a speed of 3 
m/s? 
80. A 1/5th scale model has a resistance of 19.5 N when tested in a wind 
tunnel. What would be the resistance of a half-scale model at half the 
speed in air five times as dense? 
81. If the drag coefficient of the flaps used on an aircraft is 0.92, what 
would be the drag of these flaps at 100 knots if their area totalled 3 m2? 
82. An aeroplane is to be modified, and in order to estimate the effect of the 
modification the drag of two models, one of the original and one of the 
proposed modified type, is measured in a wind tunnel. 
The model of the original is 1/20th scale and, when tested in air of 
density 1.225 kg/m3 at 33.4 m/s, the drag is 62 N. 
The model of the modified type is 1/16th scale and, when tested in air 
of density 1.007 kg/m3 at 30.8 m/s, the drag is 48 N. 
443 
NUMERICAL QUESTIONS 
By what percentage will the modification increase or decrease the drag 
coefficient of the aeroplane? 
83. The resistance of a part of an aeroplane is 640 N when the aeroplane is 
flying at 150 knots near sea-level. What will be the resistance of this part 
at a height of 20 000 ft if the 'indicated' air speed is the same, i.e. 150 
knots? (Don't forget to change knots to m/s!) 
84. What would be the resistance of this part at 20 000 ft if the 'true' air 
speed were 150 knots? 
85. If the static atmospheric pressure is 101.3 kN/m2, and the air density is 
1.225 kg/m3, what will be the pressure on the pitot side of the 
diaphragm in an air speed indicator when the forward speed of the air- 
craft is 51.4 m/s? 
86. An aircraft is flying at a true air speed of 138.8 m/s at a height of 20 000 
ft, where the air density is 0.653 kg/m3 and the pressure is 466 mb. 
What are the pressures transmitted to the air speed indicator via (a) the 
static tube and (b) the pitot tube? 
What will be the indicated air speed if the density assumed in the cali- 
bration of the instrument was 1.225 kg/m3? 
87. If an aircraft stalls in straight and level flight at an indicated speed of 
100 knots at sea-level, at what true air speed will it stall at 
(a) 20 000 ft? (b) 40 000 ft? 
88. At what indicated air speed will it stall at -- 
(a) 20 000 ft? 
(b) 40 000 ft? 
89. An air speed indicator is being calibrated with a U-tube containing 
mercury. Calculate the speed that corresponds to a height difference in 
the liquid levels in the two limbs of 40 mm. 
90. An aircraft flying at 10 000 ft runs into severe icing which blocks up the 
static tube, but leaves the pitot tube open. The aircraft descends and 
approaches to land at sea-level with the static tube still blocked by ice. 
If the pilot approaches at a true air speed of 60 knots, what speed will 
be indicated on the air speed indicator? 
91. An aircraft is flying at sea-level at a true air speed of 77.1 m/s. Calculate 
the static pressure at -- 
(a) the stagnation point, 
(b) a point on the wing surface where the local flow velocity is double 
the free stream velocity. 
444 MECHANICS OF FLIGHT 
445 
NUMERICAL QUESTIONS 
Chapter 3. Aerofoils -- subsonic speeds 
92. The table shows the lift coefficient of a flat plate at angles of attack from 
0° to 90°. A flat plate of 6 m span and 1 m chord is tested in an airstream 
of velocity 30 m/s (equivalent airspeed). Plot a graph showing how the 
lift of such a plate varies as its angle to the airflow is increased from 0° 
to 90°. 
(a) What is the maximum lift obtained? 
(b) What would be the maximum lift of an aerofoil with the life curve 
given in Fig. 3.13 of the same area under similar conditions? 
Angle of attack 0° 5° 10° 15° 20° 30° 40° 50° 60° 70° 80° 90° 
Lift coefficient 0 0.36 0.68 0.80 0.78 0.80 0.76 0.68 0.56 0.38 0.20 0 
93. If an aeroplane of mass 950 kg has a wing area of 20 m2, what is the 
wing loading in N/m2? 
94. A pressure plotting experiment is carried out in a wind tunnel on a 
model aerofoil of chord 350 mm, and large aspect ratio. Methylated 
spirit is used in the manometer. The table overleaf shows the distances 
of the holes a, b, c, d, etc., from the leading edge, and also the corre- 
sponding pressures recorded at these holes in millimetres of methylated 
spirit, the negative values representing pressures below the static 
pressure in the tunnel. The air speed was 45 m/s and the angle of attack 
4°. Find the lift coefficient for the aerofoil at this angle of attack. 
Note. Strictly speaking, from the data given, it is impossible to find the 
lift coefficient because we do not know the surface friction forces on the 
aerofoil, which will also make a small contribution to the life force 
(defined to be at right angles to the free stream direction). This can be 
safely neglected when calculating lift, but not when calculating drag. 
446 MECHANICS OF FLIGHT 
The student is advised to work this question out because it will help in 
understanding several aspects of the subject. Proceed as follows -- 
Draw the chord line to some suitable scale, preferably on squared paper, 
marking off the position of each hole a', b', c', etc., as shown in the 
figure. (There is no need to incline the chord at 4°; exactly the same 
result will be obtained, rather more simply, if it is drawn horizontal.) 
Distance from leading Pressure, mm of 
edge (mm) 
methylated spirit 
Upper surface -- 
Hole a 
5 
 228 
Hole b 
20 
 203 
Hole c 
41 
 195 
Hole d 
74 
 153 
Hole e 
103 
 112 
Hole f 
153 
 76 
Hole g 
216 
 64 
Hole h 
292 
 25 
Lower surface -- 
Hole k 
15 
 97 
Hole l 
46 
 99 
Hole m 
89 
 86 
Hole n 
153 
 56 
Hole o 
228 
 25 
Hole p 
305 
 8 
abcdefgh 
klm 
n 
op 
a'b' c' d' 
e'f'g'h' 
k' l' 
m' 
n'o'p' 
447 
NUMERICAL QUESTIONS 
At each point set off a vertical line to some suitable scale to represent 
the pressure at the corresponding hole; the line should be upwards if the 
pressure is below atmospheric, and downwards if above atmospheric. 
Draw a pressure distribution curve through the ends of these lines. 
By one of the mathematical methods, or by counting the squares, or by 
using a planimeter, find the total area enclosed by this curve. 
Divide the area by the length of the diagram, thus finding the average 
height; this represents the average pressure difference between the 
bottom and top surfaces of the aerofoil -- at right angles to the chord line 
-- in millimetres of methylated spirit. (Readers who have worked on 
engines, will recognise the similarity of this method to that of finding 
'mean effective pressure' from an indicator diagram.) 
Convert the average pressure into N/m2 of wing area (S). 
Then total force (normal to chord) average pressure S. 
This is called the normal force. 
Justaslift CL. rV2.S,sonormalforce CZ. rV2.S,whereCZ 
is called the normal force coefficient. 
Equating average pressure S to CZ . rV2 . S, the wing area (S) will 
cancel out; taking r as 1.225 kg/m3 and V as 45 m/s we can find CZ . At 
this low angle of attack we can take CL as approximately equal to CZ 
95. Taking the values of the static pressures given in the table in Q94, find 
the speed of the airflow at each of the holes and construct velocity dis- 
tribution diagrams for the upper and lower surfaces. 
Note. Bernoulli's Principle (static pressure dynamic pressure con- 
stant) can be applied directly. Over the top surface the static pressure 
decreases, so the dynamic pressure and thus the speed of the airflow 
increases. On the under surface, the static pressure increases and the 
speed of the airflow decreases. The velocity distribution diagrams 
should be plotted with the aerofoil chord as abscissa (horizontal) and 
the velocity as ordinate (vertical), and the diagrams will be similar in 
shape to the pressure plotting diagrams. Assume the density of the air 
remains constant at 1.255 kg/m3. 
96. When the angle of attack of a certain aerofoil is 12°, the direction of the 
resultant lies between the perpendicular to the chord line and the per- 
pendicular to the airflow, being inclined at 8° to the latter (see figure). If 
the total force is 700 N, find its component in the direction OC. 
12 
12 
12 
448 MECHANICS OF FLIGHT 
97. What are the lift and drag on the aerofoil in Q96? 
98. From the tables given in Appendix 1 draw curves of lift coefficient 
against angle of attack for -- 
(a) The 'general purpose' biplane aerofoil section, RAF 15. 
(b) The 'thin symmetrical' section, NACA 0009. 
(c) The 'glider and sailplane' section, NACA 23012. 
(d) The 'Lightning model' section, ASN/P1/3. 
From your curves write down the maximum lift coefficients of these 
four aerofoil sections. (These curves should be drawn to the same 
scale so that comparisons can be made between the various sections. 
The student will find it useful to keep these curves, and also those in 
the following questions, as they will be valuable in solving other 
problems.) 
99. Draw curves of drag coefficient against angle of attack for the four sec- 
tions mentioned in Q98. 
100. Draw curves of lift/drag ratio against angle of attack for the four sec- 
tions mentioned in Q98. 
101. Draw graphs to show how the centre of pressure moves as the angle of 
attack is altered on the following sections -- 
(a) Clark YH. 
(b) NACA 0009. 
(c) NACA 4412. 
(d) NACA 23018. 
Which of these four sections gives the least movement of the centre of 
pressure over the ordinary angles of flight? 
C 
O 
Direction 
of airflow 
Resultant
12° 
8° 
102. A model aerofoil section (span 0.3 m, chord 50 mm) is tested in a wind 
tunnel at a velocity of 30.8 m/s. The maximum lift obtained is 11 N. 
Find the value of the maximum lift coefficient. 
103. From the curves drawn for Q98 find the lift of a RAF 15 wing of area 
25 square metres at 75 knots, the angle of attack being 4°. 
104. What would be the lift of the wing in Q103 if it had been of NACA 
4412 section? 
105. A sailplane of total mass 300 kg is fitted with a NACA 23012 
section wing of area 20 square metres. From the graphs drawn for 
Q98 and 100, find the indicated air speed at which it should be 
flown so that the wings are operating at the maximum lift/drag 
ratio. 
106. Draw curves of lift coefficient against angle of attack for the following -- 
(a) NACA 4412. 
(b) NACA 4412 with 20% split flap set at 60°. 
(c) Lightning Model -- clean aircraft. 
(d) Lightning Model with 25% flap set at 50°. 
From these curves write down the values of the maximum lift coeffi- 
cients, and the angles of attack at which they occur. 
107. In a test on an aerofoil section the moment coefficient about the leading 
edge was found to be  0.005 at zero lift. At 6° angle of attack the 
moment coefficient about the leading edge was  0.240, and the lift and 
drag coefficients were 0.90 and 0.045 respectively. Find the position of 
the aerodynamic centre of this aerofoil section. 
108. What is the position of the centre of pressure of the aerofoil section of 
Q107 at 6° angle of attack? 
109. The aerodynamic centre of a certain aerofoil section is at 0.256 c. At an 
angle of attack of 8° the moment coefficient about the aerodynamic 
centre is  0.100 and the lift and drag coefficients are 1.05 and 0.035 
respectively. What is the moment coefficient about the quarter-chord 
point at this angle of attack? 
110. What is the position of the centre of pressure of the aerofoil section of 
Q109 at 8° angle of attack? 
111. An elliptical planform wing has a span of 12 m and a chord of 2 m. 
What is the induced drag coefficient when the lift coefficient is 0.8? 
112. What is the induced drag at 100 knots of a monoplane of mass 2400 kg 
having a wing span of 16 m? 
449 
NUMERICAL QUESTIONS 
450 MECHANICS OF FLIGHT 
113. An aircraft has a mass of 7200 kg and a wing span of 12 m. If the wing 
loading is 1.968 kN/m2, what is the induced drag when flying at speeds 
of 200 knots and 300 knots at sea-level? 
114. A monoplane has a mass of 15 000 kg, and has a span of 10 m. What is 
the induced drag at -- 
(a) 120 knots, 
(b) 240 knots, at sea-level? (assume straight and level flight) 
115. What would be the induced drag of the aircraft in the previous question 
at 40 000 ft at an indicated air speed of 240 knots? 
116. An aircraft of mass 15 000 kg is a monoplane of 20 m span. Calculate 
the induced drag at sea-level at speeds ranging from 80 to 400 knots. 
Plot the results in the form of a graph of speed (abscissa) against induced 
drag (ordinate). (The student will find it useful to keep this graph as it 
will be referred to in later questions.) 
117. Calculate the power (in kilowatts) required to overcome the induced 
drag of the aircraft at the speeds used in the previous question, and plot 
the results in the form of a graph of speed (abscissa) against power 
(ordinate). 
118. The sailplane in Q105 has an aspect ratio of 8. Find the percentage 
reduction in induced drag that would result from increasing the aspect 
ratio to 12. 
119. The following table gives the values of all the drag except induced drag 
(i.e. of form drag skin friction) of the aircraft in Q116 at various 
speeds at sea-level -- 
Speed 
80 120 160 200 240 280 320 360 400 knots 
Form drag 
skin friction 2.4 5.4 9.6 15.0 21.6 29.4 38.4 48.6 60.0 kN 
Plot these values on the graph drawn in Q116, and construct a graph 
showing the variation of the total drag with air speed. 
What percentage of the total drag is induced drag at 120, 200, 280 and 
360 knots? 
120. At what speed is the induced drag exactly half the total drag? (Note. 
This speed is the speed for minimum total drag. Keep these graphs; they 
will be referred to in later questions.) 
Chapter 4. Thrust 
121. If a propeller, on a stationary mounting, blows back 36 kg of air per 
second at a speed of 45 knots, what thrust does it produce? 
122. An aircraft engine is being tested on the ground before take-off. If the 
propeller has a diameter of 3 m, and the velocity of the slipstream is 80 
knots, what thrust is being produced? (In calculating the mass flow of 
air past the propeller take the average velocity of the air well in front of 
and behind the propeller, i.e. 40 knots.) 
123. What thrust will be produced by the propeller in the previous question 
when the aircraft is flying at 160 knots at 5000 ft, if the velocity of the 
slipstream relative to the aircraft is now 180 knots? 
124. A twin-engined aircraft, with propellers of 3 m diameter, is flying at 
10 000 ft at an air speed of 350 knots. If the aircraft has a mass of 
10 000 kg, and has a lift/drag ratio of 5 to 1 in these conditions, what 
thrust is being produced and what is the speed of the slipstream relative 
to the aircraft? 
125. The jet velocity of a gas turbine on the ground is 400 m/s; if the mass 
flow is 18 kg per second, what thrust does it produce? 
126. An aircraft powered by two gas turbines is flying at 600 knots. If the jet 
velocity is 440 m/s, and the mass flow is 66 kg/s for each engine, what is 
the total thrust being developed? 
127. What is the total power being developed by the gas turbines in Q126? 
128. If a rocket can burn and eject 100 kg of fuel per second, what jet vel- 
ocity is required to give a thrust of 50 kN? 
129. A rocket, the total mass of which is 25 kg, contains 10 kg of fuel. If all 
the fuel is burnt in 2 seconds, and is ejected with a velocity of 500 m/s, 
what thrust is produced? What would be the initial acceleration if the 
rocket were fired off vertically upwards? 
130. An aircraft using a rocket-assisted take-off system on an aircraft carrier 
has a mass of 4500 kg complete with rockets. It has a jet engine capable 
of producing 15 kN of thrust, and each rocket will produce 1566 N of 
thrust for 8 seconds. If the carrier steams at 20 knots into a head wind 
of 24 knots, how many rockets will have to be fired to get the aircraft 
airborne in a distance of 60 m along the deck if the take-off speed is 80 
knots, and the average air and wheel resistance during take-off is 8.4 kN? 
131. The pitch of a propeller is 2.5 m. If the slip is 15% when running at 
1200 rpm, what is the speed of the aeroplane to which it is fitted? 
451 
NUMERICAL QUESTIONS 
132. The maximum speed of a light aeroplane is 80 knots when the engine is 
revolving at 3000 rpm; if the pitch of the propeller is 1.1 m, what is the 
percentage slip? 
133. What is the torque of an engine which develops 1500 kW at 2400 rpm? 
134. If the engine of the previous question is fitted with a propeller which has 
an efficiency of 83% at an advance per revolution of 3 m, what will be 
the thrust of the propeller? 
135. When a certain aeroplane travels horizontally at an air speed of 300 
knots, the engine develops 800 kW. If the propeller efficiency at this 
speed is 87%, find the thrust of the propeller. 
136. The efficiency of a propeller is 78%. At what forward speed will it 
provide a thrust of 3 kN when driven by an engine of 210 kW power? 
137. A propeller is revolving at 2600 rpm on an aircraft travelling at 280 
knots. The thrust is 4 kN and the torque 2500 N-m. What is the 
efficiency of the propeller? 
138. The diameter of a propeller is 3 m. The blade angle at a distance of 1 m 
from the axis is 23°. What is the geometric pitch of the propeller? 
139. The geometric pitch of a propeller of 3 m diameter is to be 3.6 m, and 
should be constant throughout the blade. Find the blade angles at dis- 
tances 0.8 m, 1 m, and 1.2 m respectively from the axis of the 
propeller. 
Chapter 5. Level flight 
140. The mass of an aeroplane is 2000 kg. At a certain speed in straight and 
level flight the ratio of lift to drag of the complete aircraft is 7.5 to 1. If 
there is no force on the tail plane, what are the values of the lift, thrust 
and drag? 
141. In a flying boat the line of thrust is 1.6 m above the line of drag. The 
mass of the boat is 25 000 kg. The lift/drag ratio of the complete aircraft 
is 5 to 1 in straight and level flight. If there is to be no force on the tail, 
how far must the centre of pressure of the wings be in front of the centre 
of gravity? 
142. An aeroplane of 10 000 kg mass is designed with the line of thrust 0.9 m 
above the line of drag. In normal flight the drag is 18.2 kN and the 
centre of pressure on the main plane is 150 mm behind the centre of 
gravity. If the centre of pressure on the tail plane is 10 m behind the 
centre of gravity, what is the load on the tail plane? 
452 MECHANICS OF FLIGHT 
143. In a certain aeroplane the line of thrust is 100 mm below the line of 
drag. The mass of the aeroplane is 1500 kg, and the drag is 2.3 kN. If 
the aircraft is to be balanced in flight without any load on the tail, what 
must be the position of the centre of pressure relative to the centre of 
gravity? 
144. In a certain aeroplane, which has a mass of 2000 kg, the centre of lift 
and the centre of gravity are in the same vertical straight line when in 
normal cruising flight. If the thrust is 4.5 kN, and is 180 mm below the 
centre of drag, what force must there be on the tail plane which is 6 m 
behind the centre of gravity? 
145. What force would be required on the tail plane of the aeroplane in 
Q144 if the centre of lift had been 25 mm behind the centre of gravity? 
146. A jet aircraft with a mass of 6000 kg has its line of thrust 150 mm below 
the line of drag. When travelling at high speed, the thrust is 18.0 kN and 
the centre of pressure is 0.5 m behind the centre of gravity. What is the 
load on the tail plane which is 8.0 m behind the centre of gravity? 
147. An aircraft with a mass of 5500 kg is flying straight and level at its 
maximum speed. The thrust line is horizontal and is 0.3 m above the 
drag line which passes through the centre of gravity. If the drag is 12.0 
kN, and the centre of pressure is 0.6 m behind the centre of gravity, find 
the load on the tail plane which is 5.5 m behind and on a level with the 
centre of gravity. 
148. When the aircraft in the previous question is flying at its minimum 
speed, the thrust line is inclined at 25° to the horizontal. If the centre of 
pressure is now a horizontal distance of 0.1 m in front of the centre of 
gravity, what is the vertical load on the tail plane assuming that the drag 
(now 10 kN) still acts through the centre of gravity? 
149. An aircraft with a mass of 14 000 kg is fitted with a wing of 60 m2 area 
and of Clark YH section. Taking the values of the lift coefficient for this 
section from Appendix 1, calculate the indicated air speeds correspon- 
ding to the angles of attack from  2° to  25°, draw these graphs -- 
(a) Indicated air speed (abscissa) v. Angle of attack (ordinate). 
(b) Indicated air speed (abscissa) v. Lift coefficient (ordinate). 
At what speed must this aircraft fly to ensure that the wings are 
operating at the angle of attack giving the maximum lift/drag ratio? 
(Note that this speed will be the aerodynamic range speed for the air- 
craft.) 
150. If the aircraft of Q149 uses 1500 kg of fuel during a flight, what should 
be the speed at the end of the flight to keep the wings operating at the 
angle of attack which gives maximum lift/drag ratio? 
453 
NUMERICAL QUESTIONS 
454 MECHANICS OF FLIGHT 
151. Draw a graph of the values of CL /CD against angle of attack for the 
aerofoil section Clark YH. What angle of attack gives the maximum 
value of CL /CD ? Refer to the graphs drawn in Q149 and determine the 
air speed that corresponds to this angle of attack for the aircraft in ques- 
tion. Compare this air speed with four-fifths of the range speed as found 
in Q149. 
152. The aircraft in Q116 and Q119 is fitted with a 1000 kg load which is 
stowed internally. What is the new speed for maximum range? Compare 
the result with that obtained in Q120. (Note. The maximum range 
speed is that which gives the minimum total drag of the aircraft. The 
curve of total drag is rather flat in this region, so it is not easy to esti- 
mate the minimum position accurately. A better method is to find the 
speed at which the induced drag is equal to all the other drag, i.e. form 
drag skin friction, as this condition will also give the minimum total 
drag. All that is necessary in this question is to calculate the induced 
drag at the various speeds for this new load, and plot the results on the 
graph drawn for Q119. The intersection of the new induced drag curve 
and the old form drag 1 skin friction curve will give the new range 
speed.) 
153. The aircraft of Q116 is a twin-engined aircraft, and on a certain flight 
one engine fails. The pilot continues flying with the propeller of the dead 
engine wind-milling. This increases the form drag skin friction to the 
following values -- 
3 
2 
3 
2 
Speed 
80 120 160 200 240 280 320 360 400 knots 
Form drag 
skin friction 3.0 6.7 12.0 18.7 27.0 36.8 48.1 60.8 75.2 kN 
Speed 
80 120 160 200 240 280 320 360 400 knots 
Form drag 
skin friction 2.7 6.1 10.9 16.9 24.4 33.1 43.3 54.8 68.0 kN 
What is the speed for maximum range under these conditions? (See note 
under Q152) 
154. The aircraft in Q152 is fitted with a 1000 kg torpedo instead of the pre- 
vious 1000 kg load; the torpedo, however, has to be carried externally 
and this increases the form drag skin friction to the following values -- 
455 
NUMERICAL QUESTIONS 
What is the speed for maximum range under these conditions? 
155. Taking the values of the total drag at sea-level found in Q119, determine 
the power needed to drive the aircraft through the air at speeds from 80 
to 400 knots. Plot the results and find the speed at which minimum 
power is required, i.e. the speed for maximum endurance. Compare this 
speed with the range speed found in Q176. 
156. From the graph drawn for the previous question, read off the power 
required at sea-level to fly the aircraft at its maximum endurance speed, 
and calculate the power required for the same indicated air speed at 
5000 ft, 10 000 ft and 15 000 ft above sea-level. (Note. Remember that 
power depends on true air speed.) 
157. The following table gives the fuel consumption of a twin-engined 
training aircraft at various speeds at sea-level. Draw graphs of air speed 
against kg per hour, and air speed against air nautical miles per kg, and 
determine the speeds for maximum range and maximum endurance. 
True air speed 80 90 100 110 120 130 140 150 160 knots 
kg/hour 
162 152 151 158 172 190 214 241 275 
158. Determine the speeds for maximum range over the ground for the air- 
craft of the previous question when flying -- 
(a) against a head wind of 40 knots, 
(b) with a tail wind of 40 knots. 
159. If the aircraft in Q119 is to be propelled by jet engines instead of 
piston/propeller engines, what will be -- 
(a) the speed for maximum range? 
(b) the speed for maximum endurance? 
160. The fuel consumption of a jet-propelled aircraft at 220 knots indicated 
air speed, at various altitudes, is as follows -- 
Sea-level 1240 kg/h 
10 000 ft 1046 kg/h 
20 000 ft 990 kg/h 
30 000 ft 880 kg/h 
Calculate the air nautical miles per kilogram for each altitude, and plot a 
graph showing the variation of air nautical miles per kilogram with altitude. 
456 MECHANICS OF FLIGHT 
Chapter 6. Gliding and landing 
161. When there is no wind, a certain aeroplane can glide (engine off) a hor- 
izontal distance of 1 nautical miles for every 1000 ft of height. 
What gliding angle does this represent? 
162. What will be the gliding angle, and what will be the horizontal distance 
travelled per 1000 ft of height, if the aeroplane in the previous question 
glides against a head wind of 20 knots? The air speed during the glide 
can be taken as 60 knots and the wind direction as horizontal. 
163. An aeroplane glides with the engine off at an air speed of 80 knots, and 
is found to lose height at the rate of 1500 ft/min. What is the angle of 
glide? (Assume conditions of no wind.) 
164. From the result of the previous question, what is the value of the 
lift/drag for this aeroplane on this glide? 
165. At angles of attack of 1°, 4° and 10° the values of the lift/drag ratio of 
a certain aeroplane when gliding with the engine off are 3.5, 8 and 4.5 
respectively. What horizontal distance should a pilot be able to cover 
from a height of 10 000 ft if he glides at each of these angles of attack? 
166. An aeroplane of 5000 kg mass is flying at 20 000 ft. It glides to 10 000 
ft at an angle of attack giving a lift/drag ratio of 10 to 1. What is the 
horizontal distance covered? 
167. A model of a sailplane is tested in a wind tunnel, and the following 
values of CL and CD are found at the angles of attack stated: 
12 
Angle of attack 0° 2° 4° 6° 8° 10° 12° 
CL 
0.09 0.23 0.39 0.53 0.68 0.83 0.98 
CD 
0.009 0.010 0.016 0.023 0.036 0.049 0.064 
Neglecting any scale effect, what is the flattest possible gliding angle that 
should be obtainable with the full-size sailplane? and at what angle of 
attack should the sailplane be flown to cover the greatest horizontal dis- 
tance? (Assume conditions of no wind.) 
168. What angle of attack should be used with the sailplane of the previous 
question to give the minimum rate of descent? and what is the gliding 
angle under these conditions? (Assume no wind.) 
169. A sailplane with an all-up weight of 2452 N has a lift/drag ratio of 24 
to 1 when gliding for range at 40 knots. Calculate the angle of glide, and 
the sinking speed in ft/s. 
170. When flying with a heavier pilot, the all-up weight of the sailplane of the 
previous question is 2600 N. At what speed must he fly to cover the 
same range (in still air)? and what will be the sinking speed? 
171. When flying for endurance, the sailplane of Q169 has a lift/drag ratio of 
21.5 and a speed of 34 knots. Calculate the angle of glide and the 
sinking speed, and compare these with the values found in Q169. 
172. Find the minimum landing speed of an aeroplane of mass 500 kg and a 
wing area of 18.6 m2. The maximum lift coefficient of the aerofoil 
section is 1.0. 
173. When an aeroplane is fitted with an aerofoil having a maximum lift 
coefficient of 1.08, the minimum flying speed is 42 knots. If, by the use 
of slots, the maximum lift coefficient can be increased to 1.60, what will 
be the minimum flying speed when fitted with slots? 
174. It is required that a light aeroplane of mass 400 kg should land at 40 
knots. What wing area will be required if the following aerofoil sections 
are used -- 
(a) Clark YH. 
(b) NACA 4412. 
(c) NACA 23012. 
(d) NACA 4412 with flap. 
175. From curves for NACA 23018 aerofoil read the values of the lift coeffi- 
cient at angles of attack of 2°, 6° and 12°. If an aeroplane of mass 1000 
kg is fitted with this aerofoil, what air speed will be necessary for hori- 
zontal flight at each of these angles of attack, assuming that the effective 
wing area is 20 square metres? 
176. The total weight of an aeroplane is 14 715 N, and its wing area is 40 
m2. The maximum lift coefficient of the aerofoil is 1.08. What will be 
the maximum speed of flight -- 
(a) at sea-level? 
(b) at 10 000 ft? 
177. The total loaded mass of an aeroplane is 1100 kg. When NACA 651-212 
aerofoil section is used the minimum landing speed is 56 knots. With a view 
to decreasing this landing speed, the following alterations are considered -- 
(a) the fitting of slots which will increase the maximum lift coefficient 
by 40 per cent, 
(b) the fitting of flaps which will increase the maximum lift coefficient 
by 80 per cent, 
457 
NUMERICAL QUESTIONS 
(c) a 20 per cent increase in wing area. 
It is estimated that the increase in total mass necessitated by these alter- 
ations would be (a) 25 kg, (b) 30 kg and (c) 50 kg. What will be the 
resulting reduction in landing speed which can be achieved by each of 
the three methods? 
178. An aeroplane of mass 13 500 kg has a wing loading of 2.75 kN/m2. At 
8° angle of attack the lift coefficient is 0.61. What is the speed necessary 
to maintain horizontal flight at this angle of attack at sea-level? 
179. An aircraft is to be fitted with a NACA 23018 aerofoil section, and flaps 
which increase the maximum lift coefficient by 60 per cent. If the 
landing speed must not be more than 85 knots, what is the highest poss- 
ible value of the wing loading? 
180. An aircraft of 20 000 kg mass is to be fitted with a NACA 4412 aerofoil 
section with a 20 per cent split flap. If the area of the wing is to be 
84 m2, what will be the landing speed -- 
(a) with flaps lowered to 60°? 
(b) without flap? 
Chapter 7. Performance 
181. An aeroplane of mass 2700 kg has a wing area of 30 m2 of NACA 651- 
212 aerofoil section. During the take-off the pilot allows the aeroplane 
to run along the ground with its tail up until it reaches a certain speed; 
he then raises the elevators and so increases the angle of attack of the 
main planes to 12° which just enables the aeroplane to leave the ground. 
What is the required speed? 
182. What would have been the speed required for the aeroplane of the pre- 
vious question if the pilot had allowed it to continue running along the 
ground until it took off at an angle of attack of 4°? 
183. An experimental aircraft of total mass 45 000 kg has four normal 
engines, and four auxiliary lift engines to provide a short take-off when 
required. The average thrust produced by each of the normal engines 
during take-off is 12.5 kN, and the take-off run required in still air is 
2000 m. If the average resistance to motion is 11.0 kN, what is the take- 
off speed? 
184. When using the auxiliary lift engines, the aircraft of the previous ques- 
tion can take off in 1000 m at the same angle of attack in still air. What 
thrust must each lift engine produce? 
458 MECHANICS OF FLIGHT 
459 
NUMERICAL QUESTIONS 
185. An aeroplane of 3000 kg mass is climbing on a path inclined at 12° to 
the horizontal. Assuming the thrust to be parallel to the path of flight, 
what is its value if the drag of the aircraft is 5.0 kN? 
186. An aeroplane of 12 000 kg mass climbs at an angle of 10° to the hori- 
zontal with a speed of 110 knots along its line of flight. If the drag at 
this speed is 36.0 kN, find -- 
(a) the power used in overcoming drag. 
(b) the power used in overcoming the force of gravity. 
Hence find the total power required for the climb. 
187. A jet aircraft with a wing loading of 2.4 kN/m2, and a mass of 4500 kg, 
has a maximum thrust of 30 kN at sea-level. If the drag coefficient at a 
speed of 270 knots is 0.04, what will be -- 
(a) the maximum possible rate of climb? 
(b) the greatest angle of climb? 
at this speed. 
188. An aircraft of 5000 kg mass is powered by an engine capable of pro- 
ducing 1500 kW power. Calculate the maximum angle of climb at an air 
speed of 130 knots if the efficiency of the propeller is 80 per cent, and 
the drag at this speed is 6.7 kN. 
189. At sea-level the total drag of an aircraft of mass 5500 kg is 5.0 kN at a 
speed of 160 knots. Calculate the rate of climb and angle of climb at an 
indicated air speed of 160 knots at 10 000 ft, if the power available is 
980 kW and the relative air density is 0.739. 
190. For the aircraft of the previous question calculate the rate of climb and 
angle of climb at the same angle of attack, if the mass of the aircraft is 
increased to 7000 kg by the addition of internal load, and the power 
available at 10 000 ft remains unchanged. 
191. A jet aircraft weighing 58 860 N has a climbing speed of 250 knots. If 
the rate of climb is 9000 ft/min, and the drag of the aircraft in this con- 
dition is 8.2 kN, find the thrust being delivered by the engines. 
460 MECHANICS OF FLIGHT 
192. The following table gives particulars relating to a certain aeroplane of 
1050 kg mass -- 
Speed of 
level flight 
4550556065707580859095100knots 
Power available 
from propeller 135 170 205 225 240 250 255 255 250 240 230 220 kW 
Power required 
for level flight 250 115 93 90 100 120 150 180 215 255 300 350 kW 
Speed of level 
flight in knots 
5070 90110130160200240280320360400440 
Power required for 
level flight in kW 2000 750 580 540 540 6 40 610 1340 2000 2870 4000 5500 7500 
Power available from 
propellers in kW 900 1120 1300 1480 1640 1870 2130 2340 2550 2700 2800 2800 2650 
Power available from 
jets in kW 
660 950 1200 1500 1750 2170 2720 3260 3800 4340 4900 5450 6000 
Estimate the maximum and minimum speeds for level flight when the 
aircraft is propelled by the piston engine/propeller combination. 
Estimate 
(a) the minimum speed of level flight, 
(b) the maximum speed of level flight, 
(c) the best airspeed for climbing purposes, 
(d) the power available for climbing at this airspeed and 
(e) the maximum vertical rate of climb. 
193. By throttling down the engine of the aeroplane of the previous question 
the power available is reduced by 30 per cent throughout the whole 
range of speed. Find the maximum and minimum speeds for level flight 
under these conditions. 
194. An aeroplane of 1500 kg mass has a minimum landing speed of 50 
knots, and the minimum power for level flight is 60 kW at 80 knots. If 
250 kg of extra load is added, find the new minimum landing speed, and 
the new minimum power and speed for level flight, i.e. at the same angle 
of attack as before. 
195. The following table gives particulars of a certain aeroplane of 6000 kg 
mass which is designed for either piston engine/propeller or jet propul- 
sion -- 
461 
NUMERICAL QUESTIONS 
196. Estimate the maximum and minimum speeds for level flight when the 
aircraft in the previous question is propelled by the jet engines, and 
compare the speeds with those found in the previous question. 
197. Estimate the best climbing speed and rate of climb at this speed for the 
aircraft in Q195 when propelled by the piston engine/propeller combi- 
nation. 
198. Estimate the best climbing speed and rate of climb at this speed when 
the aircraft in Q195 is propelled by the jet engines. Compare these 
answers with those obtained in the previous question. 
199. When the mass of the aircraft of Q195 is increased by carrying an extra 
900 kg of fuel in overload tanks, the power required for level flight is 
increased to the following: 
Speed of level 
flight in knots 
6070 90110130160200240280320360400440 
Power required for 
level flight in kW 1600 1000 760 670 650 700 960 1385 2045 2910 4040 5535 7535 
Estimate the maximum and minimum speeds for level flight in this con- 
dition when propelled by the piston engine/propeller combination. 
200. Estimate the maximum and minimum speeds for level flight of the air- 
craft in the previous question when propelled by the jet engines. 
201. The lift produced by the wings of an aircraft travelling at 250 knots at 
sea-level is 70 kN. At what speed must the aircraft travel at 45 000 ft to 
produce the same lift at the same angle of attack of the wings? 
202. What will be the indicated air speed of the aircraft of the previous ques- 
tion at 45 000 ft? 
203. If the aircraft of Q201 has a lift/drag ratio of 10 to 1 when travelling at 
an indicated air speed of 250 knots, calculate the power required to 
propel the aircraft at this indicated air speed -- 
(a) at sea-level, 
(b) at 45 000 ft. 
204. When flying at its endurance speed of 140 knots, an aircraft of 7250 kg 
mass has a drag of 13.4 kN. Calculate the power required to propel the 
aircraft at altitudes from sea-level to 45 000 ft (at 5000 ft intervals) and 
construct a graph of -- 
Altitude (abscissa) against Power Required (ordinate). 
462 MECHANICS OF FLIGHT 
Estimate the altitude at which the power required is double that at sea- 
level. 
205. The following table gives values of the maximum power available from 
the propeller fitted to the aircraft of the previous question when flying 
at the endurance speed at various altitudes -- 
Altitude (ft) 
0 5000 10000 15000 20000 25000 30000 35000 40000 45000 
Power available 
(kW) 
2050 2095 2140 2180 2240 2085 1965 1840 1740 1630 
Note that the rated altitude of the engine is 20 000 ft. Estimate -- 
(a) the absolute ceiling of the aircraft, 
(b) the service ceiling (the altitude at which the maximum rate of climb 
is reduced to 100 ft/min). 
206. If the engine fitted to the aircraft of Q204 uses fuel at the rate of 0.275 
kg/kW hr, calculate the endurance of the aircraft -- 
(a) at sea level, and (b) at 30 000 ft, 
assuming that the aircraft has 1000 kg of fuel available for level flight, 
and that the propeller efficiency is 80 per cent at both altitudes. 
207. An aircraft weighing 13 500 kgf has a range speed of 175 knots indi- 
cated. At this speed the lift/drag ratio is 8 to 1, and the propeller 
efficiency is 82 per cent. If the fuel consumption is 0.27 kg/kW hr, cal- 
culate the air nautical miles covered per kilogram of fuel at -- 
(a) sea-level, 
(b) 20 000 ft, 
(c) 40 000 ft. 
208. If the aircraft of the previous question is propelled by jet engines at the 
same indicated speed, and if the fuel consumption is then 57 kg/kN of 
thrust hr, calculate the air nautical miles per kilogram of fuel at -- 
(a) sea-level, 
(b) 20 000 ft, 
(c) 40 000 ft. 
Compare the results with those obtained in the previous question. 
Chapter 8. Manoeuvres 
209. Find the correct angle of bank for an aeroplane of 1200 kg mass taking 
a corner of radius 60 m at 75 knots. 
210. What will be the total lift in the wings of the aeroplane in the previous 
question while taking this corner at the correct angle of bank? 
211. An aircraft with a mass of 1000 kg does a steady turn at 55 knots and 
an angle of bank of 45°. Calculate (a) the acceleration, (b) the force 
required to produce the acceleration, and (c) the wing loading on the 
aircraft during the turn if the wing area is 14.14 m2. 
212. If the aerofoil section used on the aeroplane of Q42 is NACA 23012, 
and if the total wing area is 25 metres, calculate -- 
(a) the angle of attack required for normal horizontal flight at the same 
speed of 80 knots, and 
(b) the angle of attack required to produce the necessary lift when 
turning the corner at this speed. 
213. An aeroplane of 1750 kg mass makes a horizontal turn at an angle of bank 
of 25°. If the speed in the turn is 85 knots, what is the radius of the turn? 
214. Calculate the radius of turn and angle of bank of an aircraft doing a 
Rate 1 turn (180° per minute) at 550 knots. What is the acceleration in 
multiples of g? And if the mass of the aircraft is 5000 kg, what is the lift 
force on the wings during the turn? 
215. Calculate the loading on an aircraft in a correctly banked turn at angles 
of bank of 60°, 75°, 83°, 84°. (Note. The loading is expressed as a factor 
found by dividing the lift force on the wings by the force on the wings 
in straight and level flight, i.e. the weight.) 
216. Calculate the accelerations in multiples of g for each of the turns men- 
tioned in the previous question. 
217. If the stalling speed of an aircraft is 60 knots in straight and level flight, 
what is the stalling speed in correctly banked turns at angles of bank of 
45°, 60°, 75°, 83°, 84°? 
218. Calculate the rate of turn of an aeroplane in degrees per minute if the 
acceleration during the turn is 4 g at speeds of 100 knots, 150 knots, 
300 knots, 500 knots. 
219. If the maximum load factor a certain aircraft can sustain without struc- 
tural failure is 8, what is the maximum angle of bank it can use in a 
correctly banked turn? 
463 
NUMERICAL QUESTIONS 
220. If the stalling speed of the aircraft of the previous question is 80 knots 
in straight and level flight, what will the stalling speed be in the turn at 
the maximum permissible angle of bank? 
221. What will be the radius of the turn of the aircraft of Q219 when it is 
flying on the stall at its maximum permissible angle of bank? 
222. What angles of bank are required for Rate 1 turns (180° per minute) at 
100 knots, 200 knots, 300 knots, 400 knots? 
223. What are the loadings on the aircraft in the turns in Q222? 
224. If an aircraft stalls at 110 knots in straight and level flight, what will be 
the load factor on the aircraft if it stalls in a turn at 246 knots? 
225. What will be the radius of turn when the aircraft of the previous question 
stalls at 246 knots? 
226. An aeroplane of 1500 kg mass performs a loop. If it is assumed that the 
top of the loop is in the form of a circle of radius 80 m, what must be 
the speed at the highest point in order that the loads on the aeroplane 
may be the same as those of normal horizontal flight? (If the centripetal 
force on the aeroplane at the top of the loop is just equal to the weight, 
then there will be no lift; but if the centripetal force is double the weight, 
then the lift will be the same as in normal flight, and the pilot will be 
sitting on his seat with the usual force, but upwards!) 
227. If the terminal velocity of the aeroplane of Q226, in a vertical nose dive 
with engine off, is 365 knots, what is its drag when travelling at this speed? 
228. A spherical ball of 1 kgf weight and diameter 75 mm is dropped from an 
aeroplane. What will be its terminal velocity in air of density 0.909 
kg/m3? (Take CD for the sphere as 0.8.) 
229. If, without any appreciable increase in weight, the ball is faired to a 
streamline shape, with CD of 0.05, what will be the terminal velocity in 
air of the same density? 
230. An aircraft of 6000 kg mass completes a vertical loop at a constant 
speed of 425 knots, with a height range from top to bottom of the loop 
of 3000 m. What is the acceleration and, if the area of the wing is 40 
square metres, what is the wing loading (a) at the top, (b) at the bottom 
of the loop? (Assume that the loop is in the form of a perfect circle, 
which is very unlikely in practice.) 
231. An aircraft is in a vertical terminal velocity dive at 400 knots. If, in 
pulling out of the dive, it follows the arc of a circle, what will be the 
acceleration if the height lost is 5000 ft? What is the maximum loading 
during the pull-out? 
232. What will be the acceleration and maximum loading of the aircraft in 
Q231 if the loss in height in the pull-out is only 2500 ft? 
464 MECHANICS OF FLIGHT 
Chapter 9. Stability and control 
Note. Numerical questions on stability and control are too complex to 
be included in the scope of this book. 
Chapter 10. A trial flight 
233. The landing speed of a light aircraft at sea-level is 50 knots. At what 
speed will it land on an airfield situated at an altitude of 5000 ft? 
234. The normal stalling speed of an aircraft is 55 knots. At what ground 
speed would it stall if it were flying at low level (a) into wind, (b) down 
wind, if the wind speed was 20 knots? 
235. A pilot is flying a low-level cross country exercise at a speed of 100 
knots in a wind of 20 knots. He wishes to pass vertically over a point 
on the ground on completion of a Rate 1 (i.e. 180° heading change in 1 
minute) turn of 90° from an into-wind to a cross-wind direction. How 
far from the point must the pilot start the turn? 
236. A monoplane of span 30 m and aspect ratio 7 has a profile drag coeffi- 
cient of 0.008, and a lift coefficient of 0.17, when flying at 400 knots at 
sea-level. Calculate the total drag of the monoplane under these con- 
ditions. 
237. Find the power required from an engine to drive a propeller which is 
80% efficient when it is producing 3.6 kN of thrust at 120 knots. 
238. When a certain aeroplane is in horizontal flight, the thrust and drag lie 
along the same line which is 150 mm above the centre of gravity. The 
extreme positions of the centre of pressure for level flight are 25 mm in 
front of and 200 mm behind the centre of gravity. If the tail plane is 5.5 
m behind the centre of gravity, what will be the load on the tail plane in 
each case? The mass of the aeroplane is 3500 kg, and the thrust required 
for both conditions is 7 kN. 
239. The maximum value of the lift/drag ratio for a certain aeroplane is 5.5 
to 1. Find the flattest possible gliding angle (in degrees) with the engine 
off. 
240. The total loaded mass of a two-seater aeroplane is 1700 kg, and the cor- 
responding minimum landing speed is 45 knots. What will be the 
minimum landing speed if it is flown as a single-seater, the reduction in 
mass being 80 kg? 
465 
NUMERICAL QUESTIONS 
466 MECHANICS OF FLIGHT 
241. The normal climbing speed of an aircraft of 2500 kg mass is 110 knots. 
At this speed 210 kW is required to overcome drag. With 15° of flap 
lowered, the climbing speed is 85 knots, and 220 kW is required to 
overcome the drag. If the maximum power available from the propeller 
is 375 kW, what is the angle of climb and rate of climb in each case? 
242. If the stalling speed of an aeroplane in normal flight is 42 knots, what 
will be its stalling speed when executing a correctly banked turn at 45° 
angle of bank? 
243. An aircraft completes a loop at a constant speed of 200 knots in 15 
seconds. If the loop can be considered as a vertical circle, calculate the 
radius of the loop, and the maximum and minimum loadings during the 
manoeuvre. 
Chapters 11 and 12. Flight at transonic and supersonic speeds 
244. If the speed of sound is proportional to the square root of the absolute 
temperature, calculate the speed of sound at  50°C,  50°C and 
 100°C. 
245. An aircraft has a critical Mach Number of 0.85. If the pilot cannot 
control the aircraft at higher Mach Numbers than this, what is the 
maximum permissible speed of the aircraft (a) at sea-level? (b) at 40 000 
ft? 
246. What are the maximum indicated air speeds for the aircraft of the pre- 
vious question (a) at sea-level? (b) at 40 000 ft? 
247. If the temperature at sea-level on a certain day rises to 25°C, what will 
be the maximum speed of the aircraft of Q245 at sea-level on that day? 
248. A certain aircraft has a critical Mach Number of 0.80, and a structural 
limitation which prevents it being flown at an indicated air speed greater 
than 438 knots. At what altitude are these two speeds equal? (This ques- 
tion is best solved graphically.) 
249. The following table gives the values of the drag coefficient of a thin 
aerofoil at various Mach Numbers -- 
Mach Number 0.6 0.7 0.8 0.9 1.0 1.1 1.2 1.3 1.4 
Drag Coefficient 0.01 0.011 0.019 0.05 0.068 0.063 0.052 0.044 0.037 
Mach Number 1.5 1.6 1.7 1.8 1.9 2.0 
Drag Coefficient 0.032 0.028 0.026 0.022 0.021 
467 
NUMERICAL QUESTIONS 
Calculate the drag of the aerofoil at sea-level at these Mach Numbers 
taking the area of the aerofoil as 40 square metres, and plot a graph of 
Drag (ordinate) v. Mach Number (abscissa). 
250. Calculate the power necessary to propel the aerofoil of the previous 
question at speeds corresponding to the Mach Numbers given, and plot 
a graph of Power (ordinate) against Mach Number (abscissa). Compare 
the shape of this curve with that obtained for Q249. 
251. Construct a graph similar to that in Fig. 11.9 for an aircraft which stalls 
at 115 knots at sea-level, and has a critical Mach Number of 0.85. 
Estimate the maximum height at which it can fly, assuming that it 
cannot fly at Mach Numbers above the critical Mach Number. 
252. The diagram shows the variation of the specific excess power (Ps ) in m/s 
for a supersonic fighter-type aircraft. Estimate -- 
Ps= 150 
Altitude, thousands of feet
T.A.S., knots 
70 
60 
50 
40 
30 
20 
10 
200 400 600 800 1000 1200 1400 
Stalling speed 
M=1
Ps=0 
Ps =0 
Ps=50 
Ps =50 
Ps =100 
Ps=100 
Ps =150 
Ps=200 
Specific excess power (Ps) in m/s for supersonic aircraft 
(a) The speed range in Mach Nos. at 50 000 ft altitude. 
(b) The speed range in Mach Nos. at 60 000 ft altitude. 
(c) The highest altitude at which the aircraft can fly at M 2. 
(Note. The student may like to consider how the pilot would get to 
60000ft whenflyingatM 1at50000ft.) 
468 MECHANICS OF FLIGHT 
253. The following table gives values of the drag coefficient for a supersonic 
aircraft together with the specific fuel consumption (kg/kN Thrust h) of 
the engines fitted to the aircraft for three cruising altitudes -- 
Mach Number 1.7 1.8 1.9 
2.0 2.1 
2.2 
CD 
0.037 0.034 0.032 0.031 0.031 0.031 
SFCat50000ft 54 
54 
54 
55 
56 
57 
SFCat55000ft 66 
66 
67 
68 
69 
70 
SFCat60000ft 85 
86 
86 
87 
88 
89 
Determine the speed and altitude at which the aircraft should be flown 
for optimum range performance in still air. 
254. Calculate the Mach Angle for flows at M 1, 2 and 3. 
255. Calculate the rise in temperature of the surface of an aeroplane travel- 
ling at 650 knots at sea-level, using the (V/100)2 formula given in 
Chapter 12. 
256. Using the more general formula in which the temperature rise is given 
by (M2T)/5, calculate the speed required at 40 000 ft to raise the tem- 
perature of the aircraft surface to 15°C. 
Chapter 13. Space flight 
257. The Law of Universal Gravitation can be expressed mathematically as -- 
F 6.67 10 11 m1m2/d2 
where F is the gravitational force in newtons between two masses of m1 
and m2 kg separated by d metres. Calculate the force of attraction 
between (a) the earth and the moon, and (b) the earth and the planet 
Venus (mass 0.81 that of the earth). 
258. Calculate the acceleration due to gravity at a distance of 12 000 km 
from the centre of the earth. 
259. Calculate the acceleration of the moon towards the earth. 
260. A communications satellite is positioned on a 'stationary orbit' over a 
geographical point on the equator. Calculate the radius of its orbit and 
its speed. 
261. A satellite of 100 kg mass is circling the earth on a radius of 18 000 km 
from the centre of the earth. Calculate -- 
(a) the force exerted on the satellite by the earth, and 
(b) the time taken for one complete orbit. 
262. A satellite of 250 kg mass is required to orbit the moon at a distance of 
1750 km from the centre of the moon; at what speed must it travel 
round its orbit? (Take the mass of the moon as 0.0123 times the mass 
of the earth.) 
263. To what value must the speed of a 6000 kg space vehicle be reduced so 
that it will orbit 100 km above the surface of the moon? 
264. Calculate the thrust to be produced by the retro-rocket, and the time for 
which it must operate, to put the space vehicle of the previous question 
into its desired orbit of the moon if its transit speed is 10.5 km/s and the 
deceleration is to be 50 m/s2. 
265. Calculate the thrust required to lift a 1500 kg space vehicle off the 
surface of the moon and accelerate it vertically upwards to a speed of 
1.5 km/s in 30 s. 
266. A satellite is circling the equator at a distance of 800 km from the 
surface of the earth, and in an east to west direction. If it crosses the 
Greenwich meridian at noon, when will it be vertically over the 180° 
line of longitude? 
267. The radius of the planet Venus is about 6115 km, and its mass is about 
0.81 times that of the earth. Calculate the acceleration due to gravity at 
the surface of Venus. 
268. Find the escape velocity at a distance of 2000 km from the earth's 
surface. 
269. The radius of Mars is about 3376 km, and its mass about 0.1 times that 
of the earth. What will be the velocity of a satellite circling Mars at a 
distance of 10 000 km from the centre of the planet? 
270. Venus and Mars are approximately 42 000 000 and 56 000 000 km 
respectively from the earth. What are the radii of their zones of influence 
relative to the earth? 
271. Using the data of the previous questions calculate the escape velocities 
at the surface of -- 
(a) Venus, 
(b) Mars. 
469 
NUMERICAL QUESTIONS 
Appendix 1. Aerofoil data 
Five questions (a), (b), (c), (d), (e) are given at the end of the data for 
each aerofoil section. 
Appendix 2. Scale effect 
272. The viscosity of air varies with the temperature according to the formula -- 
where m1 and m2are the viscosities at the absolute temperatures T1 and 
T2 respectively. Find the viscosity of air at  25°C,  5°C,  5°C, and 
 25°C. 
273. An aircraft 12 m in length cruises at 77.1 m/s at sea-level. Find its 
Reynolds Number under these conditions. 
274. The average length of the chord of a wing of a certain aircraft is 3.05 
m. Taking this as the length L, calculate the Reynolds Number when 
flying at sea-level at 102.8 m/s. 
275. A 1/10th scale model of the aircraft of the previous question is tested in 
a wind tunnel at 67 m/s, at a temperature of 288 K, the density of air in 
the tunnel being 1.225 kg/m3. What is the Reynolds Number of the test? 
276. What will be the Reynolds Number if the test of the previous question 
is conducted in a compressed air tunnel in which the pressure is 1013 
kN/m2 and the temperature 298 K? 
277. What must be the pressure in the compressed air tunnel of the previous 
question if the 1/10th scale model test is to have the same Reynolds 
Number as the full-scale aircraft in Q280, assuming that the maximum 
speed of the tunnel under these conditions is 75 m/s and the temperature 
298 K? 
278. By what percentage will the Reynolds Number be raised or lowered if 
the temperature in the compressed air tunnel in the previous question is 
reduced to 5°C, assuming that no more air is pumped into the tunnel 
during the cooling process? 
279. Find the Reynolds Number of a test conducted in a decompressed air 
tunnel on an aerofoil of 0.46 m chord at a Mach Number of 0.85, a tem- 
perature of 15°C and a pressure of 20.26 kN/m2. 
3 
4 
T1 
T2 
m1 
m2 
470 MECHANICS OF FLIGHT 
Chapter 1 
Answers to 
numerical questions 
APPENDIX4 
1. (a) 114.8 km/h, (b) 18.5 s 
2. (a) 0.25 m/s2, (b) 458 m, 
(c) 1833 m 
3. (a) 1.39 m/s2, (b) 26.8 s 
4. 58 knots, 300 m 
5. 58 km/h 
6. (a) 12.3 m, (b) 49.2 m 
7. 24.97 km, 2 min 22.7 s 
8. 536m 
9. 5.503 kN 
10. 11.36 m/s 
11. 425.4 m/s 
12. 98.1 N 
13. 117.7 N 
14. 6.84 106N 
15. 8.432 kN 
16. 1009.8 kN 
17. 462.96 kN 
18. (a) 80.65 kgf, (b) 71.35 kgf, 
(c) 76 kgf 
19. 113.5 kN 
20. 16.62 kN 
21. 110.25 m 
22. 70.7 N 
23. 8.17 m 
24. 297.1 m/s 
25. 7648 N 
26. 4823 N 
27. 722.5 mm 
28. 7.7 knots 
29. 38.15 kN 
30. 1582 N 
31. 457.5 m 
32. 119.1 kN 
33. 2226 kJ, 40.47 m 
34. 236 rad/s, 353.6 m/s 
472 MECHANICS OF FLIGHT 
35. 314 rad/s, 15 m/s 
36. 83 350 m/s2 
37. 7402 m/s2 
38. 39.48 N, (a) 29.67 N, 
(b) 49.29 N 
39. 9.81 m/s2 
40. 3h58min50s 
41. 87.34 km/h 
42. (a) 25.41 kN, (b) 59°55 , 
(c) 29.36 kN 
43. 1471.5 kJ, 12.26 kW 
44. 353.3 kW 
45. 2650 kW 
46. 7.65 kW 
47. 361.25 kJ, 425 m/s 
48. 112 500 kJ 
49. 10m 
Chapter 2 
50. 1.044 kg/m3 
51. 0.116 kg 
52. 470.4 kg 
53. 439.7 kg 
54. (a) 0.906 kg/m3 (0.905), 
(b) 0.414 kg/m3 (0.414) 
55. 19 700 ft 
56. 580 ft 
57. 776 ft 
58. 4.687 kg/s 
59. (a) 45 kt, (b) 48.35 kt, 
(c) 57.5 kt, (d) 95 kt 
60. (a)3h12min,(b)3h15min, 
(c)3h13min 
61. 507 knots 
62. 497 knots 
63. 17 min, 13 min, 10 min, 13 min 
64. 175 N 
65. 700 N 
66. 5.7 N 
67. 4.632 kN 
68. 10.6 N 
69. 20 m/s 
70. 196 N 
71. 10.549 kN 
72. 0.804 
73. 0.251 
74. 314 N 
75. 8.537 kN 
76. 172 N 
77. 50.24 kN 
78. 0.091 
79. 4.1 N 
80. 152 N 
81. 4.474 kN 
82. Decrease by 29.3% 
83. 640 N 
473 
ANSWERS TO NUMERICAL QUESTIONS 
84. 341 N 
85. 102.9 kN/m2 
86. (a) 46.6 kN/m2, 
(b) 52.9 kN/m2, 101.3 m/s 
87. (a) 137 kt, (b) 201 kt 
88. (a) 100 kt, (b) 100 kt 
89. 181 knots 
90. 408 knots 
91. (a) 104.9 kN/m2, 
(b) 90.3 kN/m2 
Chapter 3 
92. (a) 2.7 kN, (b) 6.3 kN 
93. 466 N/m2 
94. 0.84 
95. Diagram 
96. 48.8 N 
97. 693N,97N 
98. (a) 1.22, (b) 0.90, (c) 1.23, 
(d) 1.27 
99. (a) 0.0074, (b) 0.009, 
(c) 0.010, (d) 0.019 
100. (a) 26.8 at 2.2°, 
(b) 47.3 at 7.5°, 
(c) 60.0 at 8°, (d) 7.6 at 8° 
101. NACA 0009 
102. 1.26 
103. 10.486 kN 
104. 18.236 kN 
105. 31 knots 
106. (a) 1.37 at 13°, 
(b) 2.66 at 10.5°, 
(c) 1.27 at 30°, (d) 1.28 at 25° 
107. 0.261 c 
108. 0.267 c 
109. 
 0.106 
110. 0.352 c 
111. 0.034 
112. 425 N 
113. 1.700 kN, 756 N 
114. (a) 29.516 kN, (b) 7.379 kN 
115. 7.379 kN 
116. Diagram 
117. Diagram 
118. 331G3% 
119. 57.7%, 15.1%, 4.4%, 1.7% 
120. 130 knots 
Chapter 4 
121. 833 N 
122. 7.336 kN 
123. 6.719 kN 
124. 19.62 kN, 367 knots 
125. 7.2 kN 
126. 17.336 kN 
127. 5351 kW 
128. 500 m/s 
129. 2.5 kN, 90.19 m/s2 
130. Four 
474 MECHANICS OF FLIGHT 
131. 83 knots 
132. 25.2% 
133. 5996 N-m 
134. 10.375 kN 
135. 4.510 kN 
136. 106 knots 
137. 84.6% 
138. 2.67 m 
139. 35°36 , 29°48 , 25°31 
Chapter 5 
140. 19.62 kN, 2.616 kN, 2.616 kN 
141. 0.32 m 
142. 3.157 kN downwards 
143. 15.6 mm behind C.G. 
144. 135 N upwards 
145. 53.5 N upwards 
146. 4.284 kN downwards 
147. 7.341 kN downwards 
148. 318 N upwards 
149. 180 knots 
150. 170 knots 
151. 5 °, 151 knots 
152. 134 knots 
153. 122 knots 
154. 126 knots 
155. 100 knots 
156. 720 kW, 776 kW, 838 kW, 
908 kW 
157. 116 knots, 96 knots 
158. (a) 130 knots, (b) 110 knots 
159. (a) 173 knots, (b) 130 knots 
160. 0.177, 0.245, 0.304, 0.408 
a.n.m. per kg 
12 
Chapter 6 
161. 6°16 
162. 9°22 , 1847 m (0.9974 n.miles) 
163. 10°40 
164. 5.3 to 1 
165. 5.76, 13.17, 7.41 n.miles 
166. 16.46 n.miles 
167. 2°21 , 4° 
168. 6°, 2°29 
169. 2°21 , 2.77 ft/s 
170. 41.2 knots, 2.45 ft/s 
171. 2°40 , 2.67 ft/s 
172. 40.3 knots 
173. 34.5 knots 
174. (a) 10.58 m2, (b) 11.12 m2, 
(c) 12.30 m2, (d) 5.71 m2 
175. 96kt,65kt,53kt 
475 
ANSWERS TO NUMERICAL QUESTIONS 
176. (a) 46 kt, (b) 53 kt 
177. (a)8kt,(b)14kt,(c)4kt 
178. 167 knots 
179. 1.986 kN/m2 
180. (a) 74 kt, (b) 103 kt 
Chapter 7 
181. 71.7 knots 
182. 99.5 knots 
183. 114 knots 
184. 55.2 kN 
185. 11.12 kN 
186. (a) 2037 kW, 
(b) 1157 kW, 3194 kW 
187. (a) 13 197 ft/min, (b) 28°51 
188. 13°15 
189. 1829 ft/min, 5°34 
190. 839 ft/min, 2°16 
191. 29.124 kN 
192. 47.5 kt, 89 kt, 64 kt, 142 kW, 
2714 ft/min 
193. 79.5 kt, 49.5 kt 
194. 54 kt, 75.6 kW, 86 kt 
195. 312 kt, 59 kt 
196. 398 kt, 64 kt 
197. 175 kg, 4181 ft/min 
198. 245 kt, 6438 ft/min 
199. 309 kt, 67 kt 
200. 397 kt, 72 kt 
201. 568 knots 
202. 250 knots 
203. (a) 900 kW, (b) 2045 kW 
204. 39 700 ft 
205. (a) 37 000 ft, (b) 36 250 ft 
206. (a)3h1min,(b)1h51min 
207. (a) 0.36, (b) 0.36, 
(c) 0.36 a.n.m. per kg 
208. (a) 0.19, (b) 0.25, 
(c) 0.37 a.n.m. per kg 
Chapter 8 
209. 68°26 
210. 32 kN 
211. (a) 9.81 m/s2, (b) 9.81 kN, 
(c) 981 N/m2 
212. (a) 4°, (b) 10° 
213. 418 m 
214. 5402 m, 56°30 , 1.51 g, 
88.87 kN 
215. 2.0, 3.86, 8.2, 9.53 
216. 1.73, 3.73, 8.14, 9.51 
217. 71 kt, 85 kt, 118 kt, 172 kt, 
185 kt 
218. 2621°/min, 174°/min, 
874°/min, 524°/min 
219. 82°49 
220. 226 knots 
476 MECHANICS OF FLIGHT 
221. 174 m 
222. 15°21 , 28°47 , 39°29 , 47°42 
223. 1.04, 1.14, 1.30, 1.49 
224. 5 
225. 333 m 
226. 77 knots 
227. 14.7 kN 
228. 78 m/s 
229. 312 m/s 
230. 31.87 m/s2, (a) 3.31 kN/m2, 
(b) 6.25 kN/m2 
231. 27.8 m/s2, 3.83 
232. 55.6 m/s2, 6.7 
Chapter 10 
233. 54 knots 
234. (a) 35 knots, (b) 75 knots 
235. 1191 m 
236. 31.012 kN 
237. 277.8 kW 
238. 156.1 N up, 1.296 kN down 
239. 10°18 
240. 43.9 knots 
241. 6°50 , 1324 ft/min, 8°19 , 
1244 ft/min 
242. 49.9 knots 
243. 245.5 m, 5.4, 3.4 
Chapters 11 and 12 
244. 582 kt, 700 kt, 752 kt 
245. (a) 562 kt, (b) 488 kt 
246. (a) 562 kt, (b) 242 kt 
247. 572 knots 
248. 10 000 ft 
249. Diagram 
250. Diagram 
251. 73 500 ft 
252. (a) M 0.66 to 1.0 and M 1.24 
to 2.33, (b) M 1.54 to 2.11, 
(c) 63 000 ft 
253. M1.8at55000ft 
254. 90°, 30°, 19°28 
255. 42°C 
256. 734 knots 
Chapter 13 
257. (a) 1.984 1026 N, 
(b) 1.094 1018 N 
258. 2.76 m/s2 
259. 0.0027 m/s2 
260. 41 850 km, 11 100 km/h 
261. (a)123N,(b)6h41min 
262. 1.673 km/s 
263. 1.718 km/s 
477 
ANSWERS TO NUMERICAL QUESTIONS 
264. 300 kN for 2 min 55.64 s 
265. 77.421 kN 
266. 1247 hours G.M.T. 
267. 8.62 m/s2 
268. 9.753 km/s 
269. 1.995 km/s 
270. Venus 19 900 000 km, 
Mars 13 450 000 km 
271. (a) 10.27 km/s, (b) 4.856 km/s 
Appendix 1 
RAF 15 
(a) (i) 11.3, (ii) 26.8 
(b) (i) 27°, (ii) 15° 
(c) (i)  0.085, (ii)  0.051 
(d) (i) 36, (ii) 174 
(e) (i) 15.60, (ii) 15.06 
CLARK YH 
(a) (i) 0.001, (ii) 0.004, (iii) 0.005 
(b) 0.236 c 
(c) 18.2° 
(d) 159 
(e) (i) 16.55, (ii) 15.90 
NACA 0009 
(a) 0, Yes (from  8° to  8°) 
(b) 0.25 c 
(c) 0.385 c 
(d) (i) 21.0, (ii) 45.7, (iii) 40.9 
(e) (i) 9.6°, (ii) 6° 
NACA 4412 
(a) (i)  0.091, (ii)  0.095 
(b) (i) 0.489 c, (ii) 0.333 c 
(c) (i) 38.0, (ii) 67.6 
(d) (i) 13°, (ii) 10° 
(e)1 
3 
7 
NACA 23012 
(a) (i) 15, (ii) 50, (iii) 60 
(b) (i) 0.33 c, (ii) 0.265 c, (iii) 0.264 c 
(c) 0.30 c 
(d)1 
2 
° 
(e) (i) 21.60, (ii) 37.08, (iii) 49.96 
NACA 23018 
(a) 0.18cat0.30c 
(b) (i)  23.3, (ii) 12.0, (iii) 44.2, 
(iv) 56.3, (v) 40.8 
(c) (i) 0.253 c, (ii) 0.25 c, 
(iii) 0.253 c 
(d)1 
2 
° 
(e) 1.06 
NACA 651--212 
(a)  0.032 0.002 between  8° 
and  8° angle of attack 
(b) 0.40 c 
(c) (i) 10.5°, (ii) 6° 
(d)5 
3 
. 
3 
(e)1 
2 
0 
478 MECHANICS OF FLIGHT 
ASN/P1/3 
(a) 0.0594 
(b) 0.45 c 
(c) (i) 30°, (ii) 25° 
(d) (i) 5.7, 5.8, 3.6, 
(ii) 4.6, 4.9, 3.1 
(e) (i) 0.442 c, (ii) 0.468 c, 
(iii) 0.507 c 
Appendix 2 
272. 15.99 10 6 N-s/m2 
16.95 10 6 N-s/m2 
17.43 10 6 N-s/m2 
18.36 10 6 N-s/m2 
273. 63.39 106 
274. 21.48 106 
275. 1.399 106 
276. 13.63 106 
277. 1426 kN/m2 
278. Raised by 5.3% 
279. 1.82 106 
Tail end 
Tailplane of the Antonov An-225 Mriya. 
Chapter 1 
1. The lift is decelerating in the downwards direction, so the acceleration 
is upwards. 
2. (a) Pressure is a scalar quantity: it has no direction; pressure is meas- 
ured by the force that it would produce on an area. 
(b) A moment is the product of a force and a distance (the moment 
arm). Momentum is the product of a mass and a velocity. 
(c) Power is the rate of doing work: force distance/time. 
3. To pull a body up an inclined plane only requires that the force be equal 
and opposite to the component of the weight acting in the direction of 
the slope of the plane. 
The same work is done in each case; on the inclined plane, the force is 
smaller, but the distance moved is correspondingly larger. 
4. Mass is a measure of the quantity of matter in a body. Weight is the 
force produced by the gravitational attraction between the body and a 
heavenly body (the earth, unless otherwise specified). 
5. To accelerate the aircraft requires that the thrust exceeds the drag, but 
when a steady speed is reached, it will be maintained as long as the drag 
equals the thrust. 
6. Yes, the aircraft is accelerating. 
7. Yes, the centre of gravity of a ring is outside the material of the ring. The 
centre of gravity of a piece of bent wire will also not normally lie on the 
wire. 
Answers to non- 
numerical questions 
APPENDIX5 
480 MECHANICS OF FLIGHT 
8. (a) Yes. 
(b) No, it will normally be accelerating. 
9. (a) Less. 
(b) Same. 
(c) More. 
(d) More. 
(e) Same. 
10. Yes, otherwise they would be in equilibrium, and no movement would 
take place, so it would be stalemate. 
11. (a) Yes. 
(b) Yes. 
12. The flag will hang down limply, because there will be no relative motion 
between the balloon and the air. 
Chapter 2 
1. The pressure altimeter only tells you what height the external pressure 
would be given by in an International Standard Atmosphere. 
2. Air density is a measure of the mass of air in a given volume. 
3. The pressure. 
4. The altimeter can be set so that it reads zero height when the pressure 
reaches the ground-level value at a specified location, usually the local 
airfield ground-level; the aircraft should then not hit the runway before 
the indicated height reaches zero. Alternatively, while en route, it can be 
set to read zero at the sea-level pressure, so that the pilot knows how 
high he is above features given on a map. 
5. The temperature, density and pressure will all be lower. 
6. A streamlined shape is one where the flow is able to follow the contours 
without separating. 
7. See the definitions in the chapter. 
8. This is the dynamic pressure. 
9. This is the error on the air speed indicator reading caused by the static 
hole not being located at a position where the pressure is exactly equal 
to the free-stream static pressure. 
10. The troposphere is the lowest part of the atmosphere, where the tem- 
perature varies almost linearly with height. The stratosphere is above 
the troposphere, and is the part where the temperature remains nearly 
constant with height. 
11. Subsonic means that the speed of the object relative to the air is less than 
the local speed of sound. Supersonic means that it is greater. 
12. The symbol q stands for dynamic pressure. 
Chapter 3 
1. As the angle of attack increases, a lift force develops due to the differ- 
ence in pressure between upper and lower surfaces. This is mainly 
caused by a reduction in pressure on the upper surface. When the angle 
of attack increases too far the flow separates from the upper surface, this 
leads to a reduction in lift as the aerofoil stalls. 
2. The centre of pressure is the point through which the aerodynamic force 
can be considered to act on the aerofoil. 
3. Because the forces on an aerofoil are primarily dependent on the 
dynamic pressure and the wing area, if the lift or drag are divided by the 
product of these quantities, a force coefficient is obtained which 
depends mainly on angle of attack. This makes it easier to translate the 
results from, for example, an experiment to the full-scale aircraft. It 
must be remembered, though, that Reynolds number and Mach number 
will also have an effect (see Appendix 2 and Chapter 11). 
4. The aerodynamic centre of an aerofoil section is the point about which 
the moment coefficient remains constant with changes in angle of 
attack. 
5. The stalling angle of an aerofoil is the angle of attack at which the flow 
separates from the top surface, leading to a reduction in lift. The exact 
angle at which this happens is open to discussion -- see the text! Apart 
from Reynolds number and Mach number effects (see question 3) this 
happens at a particular angle of attack independently of the air speed. 
6. The aspect ratio of a wing is equal to the square of its span divided by 
its area. It is important because it influences the strength of the trailing 
vortices for a given lift, and hence the drag produced by these vortices. 
481 
ANSWERS TO NON-NUMERICAL QUESTIONS 
Chapter 4 
1. A ramjet has no turbine or compressor. Air is compressed purely by 
aerodynamic effects before it enters the combustion chamber. It is only 
of practical use at supersonic speeds where use can be made of shock 
wave compression. 
2. The blade angle is the angle at which the propeller blade is set in relation 
to the plane of rotation. The angle reduces as the tip is approached 
because the speed at the tip is higher than it is near the spinner. The 
angle at which the blade is set must therefore be reduced as the tip is 
approached, to maintain the same local angle of attack at each section 
of the blade. 
3. The advance per revolution is the actual forward distance travelled in 
one propeller revolution. The geometric pitch is equal to 2rt tan qand is 
equivalent to the advance of a screw of 'blade' angle q through a solid 
object. The experimental mean pitch is the advance per revolution at 
zero thrust. 
4. Slip is the difference between the actual advance per revolution and the 
experimental mean pitch. 
5. The angle of attack of a propeller blade is reduced by an increase in the 
aircraft air speed. To compensate for this it is desirable to use a higher 
blade angle (coarser pitch) as air speed increases. 
6. Tip speed is important because it is at the tip that the local air speed is 
highest. Therefore the speed of sound may be reached at the tip long 
before the forward speed of the aircraft approaches this value. This may 
lead to the formation of shock waves over the tip with a marked loss of 
efficiency. 
7. The solidity influences the ability of a propeller of given diameter and 
rotational speed to absorb power. It may be increased by increasing the 
number of blades or the chord of the blades. 
8. Outside the atmosphere propulsion can be achieved by any system 
which ejects matter from the craft. It is necessary to employ a high vel- 
ocity of projection so that adequate thrust can be obtained without 
ejecting too much mass. If the required ejection velocity is produced by 
combustion then the oxidant must be carried in the craft since no air is 
available. This is effectively rocket propulsion. 
482 MECHANICS OF FLIGHT 
Chapter 5 
1. The four forces are lift, weight, thrust, and drag. 
2. For equilibrium the sum of the forces must be zero and they must 
produce no moment. 
3. The weight of the aircraft will change as fuel is used or stores are 
dropped and this will also change the position of the centre of gravity. 
The lift will change to compensate for the weight change in level flight, 
or to provide additional lift for manoeuvres. The centre of lift will also 
change, particularly if the change in lift is produced by a change in angle 
of attack rather than speed. Changes in lift will be accompanied by 
changes in drag which in turn must be accompanied by an equal change 
in thrust to maintain equilibrium. Changes in the line of action of the 
latter forces are likely to be fairly small for conventional aircraft. 
4. The lift of the aircraft depends on angle of attack and speed. The speed 
can be changed by changing the angle of attack to give the same overall 
lift as the speed is altered. Generally this will be accompanied by some 
change in drag so some adjustment will be needed to the throttle to com- 
pensate. The speed range can be further extended by the use of high-lift 
devices to increase the maximum lift coefficient that can be obtained 
from the wing. 
5. The relationship will be the same for indicated air speed but not for true 
air speed (see p. 163). At height a higher true air speed will be needed 
to give the same lift at a given angle of attack. 
6. As the weight is increased a higher angle of attack will be needed at a 
given air speed. 
7. (a) As far as the airframe is concerned the minimum drag will be 
approximately independent of altitude. The aircraft should then be 
flown at the best altitude for maximum engine efficiency, i.e. the 
height at which the throttle setting is fully open for the most eco- 
nomical fuel--air ratio. At greater heights the engine efficiency will 
be lower and the range consequently less. 
(b) For maximum endurance with a piston engine we need to fly at 
minimum power as far as the airframe is concerned. Because the 
true air speed increases with height at the optimum angle of attack 
for minimum power, it is best to fly at low altitude for maximum 
endurance. 
(c) Because the best angle of attack, and hence speed, for minimum power 
required by the airframe is different than that for minimum drag. 
483 
ANSWERS TO NON-NUMERICAL QUESTIONS 
8. (a) Because the efficiency of a jet engine increases with speed a com- 
promise between the best operating speed for the airframe and the 
engine is required. The aircraft must therefore be flown at a speed 
greater than that for minimum airframe drag. 
(b) True air speed for a given angle of attack increases with height and 
temperature falls. Both of these improve engine efficiency, therefore 
it is best to cruise high for maximum range in a jet aircraft. 
(c) Because the fuel flow in a jet aircraft is approximately proportional 
to thrust, the aircraft should be flown at the minimum drag speed 
for best endurance. There is some advantage in flying high from the 
point of view of improved engine efficiency. 
Chapter 6 
1. If the aircraft is operating at the minimum angle of glide then it is oper- 
ating at its minimum drag for the weight. If the pilot pulls the nose up 
then the drag will increase and the glide angle steepen. 
2. Lowering flaps during the glide will generally steepen the glide angle 
because the best lift to drag ratio is likely to be in the flaps-up configuration. 
3. The load carried will not greatly alter the minimum glide angle, because 
the maximum lift to drag ratio, at which the minimum glide angle 
occurs, depends on angle of attack. To get the same lift at this angle of 
attack, however, the gliding speed must increase at heavier weights. 
4. No! The flattest glide occurs at minimum drag. For maximum time in 
the air we need to operate at the minimum power condition so that the 
potential energy due to height is lost at the lowest possible rate. 
5. (a) The true airspeed at stall will be higher the greater the altitude. 
However, the speed indicated on the air speed indicator will be 
approximately the same irrespective of height because the instru- 
ment works by sensing the dynamic pressure and no correction is 
made in its calibration for the change in density with height. 
(b) The stalling angle will not change with height. 
6. An engine-assisted approach allows the glide angle to be increased if 
necessary by a reduction in the throttle setting. If a 'go around' is 
required the engine can be set to full power quicker. 
7. The lowering of flaps may change the position of the centre of pressure 
of the wing and produce a pitching moment (generally nose-down) 
which must be overcome by the tailplane. 
484 MECHANICS OF FLIGHT 
8. A couple of things to get you started. After that you are on your own! 
Happy landings. 
You need to fly at minimum glide angle, i.e. at minimum drag. Are the 
things you are carrying mounted outside the aeroplane and increasing 
the drag? Before you release them, is there a headwind? To reduce the 
effect of this you need a high gliding speed and so a lot of weight. If 
there is a tail wind you need a low speed to increase the effect of wind 
on range. Now it's up to you. 
Chapter 7 
1. When the aircraft is climbing its path is inclined to the horizontal. 
Because the lift is measured at right angles to the flight path, only the 
component of weight which is also normal to the flight path must be 
balanced by the lift. The other component must be supplied by the 
thrust. 
If you still don't believe it, imagine an aircraft with an engine thrust 
greater than the weight. It can 'stand on its tail' and climb vertically 
with no lift at all. 
2. For a jet aircraft maximum true air speed does not vary greatly over a 
wide altitude range. It is usually limited by compressibility effects (see 
Chapters 11 and 12). For a piston engine the relationship can be com- 
plicated by the question of supercharging, but will fall off at high 
altitude; engine power is limited and does not increase with forward 
speed like a jet engine. Because of the reducing density, the best true air 
speed as far as the airframe is concerned increases with altitude and the 
power available from the engine is insufficient to cope. 
The minimum true air speed will increase with altitude, although the 
indicated minimum speed will be nearly constant. 
3. Ceiling is the maximum height that can be reached. Service ceiling leaves 
something in hand for manoeuvres. It is usually specified as the height 
at which the rate of climb falls to a specified level. 
4. No! It is the attitude of the aircraft that matters and this will require a 
change in true air speed at different heights. 
5. An increase in weight will mean a reduction in range and endurance. 
There will also be an increase in minimum speed and a reduction in 
maximum rate of climb and ceiling. 
485 
ANSWERS TO NON-NUMERICAL QUESTIONS 
Chapter 8 
1. The degrees of freedom are -- 
(a) Three translational degrees of freedom along the three aircraft axes. 
(b) Three rotational degrees of freedom along the same axes. 
2. The radius of turn may be limited by -- 
(a) Wing stalling because of increased lift required in the turn. 
(b) Engine power because the increased lift increases the drag and 
required power. 
(c) The structural strength of the wing being exceeded because of 
increased lift. 
3. This is a bit of a trick question -- be careful! 
Because the aircraft complete the circuit in the same time, the one at the 
greater radius is going faster. If you check the acceleration towards the 
centre for a constant circuit time, you will find it is proportional to the 
radius of the turn. The aircraft at the higher radius will therefore need 
to bank more than the one on the inside. 
4. As the aircraft turns and climbs the upward motion reduces the angle of 
attack on the wings. Because the inner wing is turning on a smaller 
radius than the outer wing it suffers a greater reduction in angle of 
attack and a consequent loss of lift compared to the outer wing. This 
tends to increase the bank which must be held off by the ailerons. The 
reverse is clearly true in a gliding turn. 
5. In a spin one wing is stalled with the aircraft describing a spiral path down- 
wards. The variation of lift with angle of attack at the stall is such that the 
aircraft can become locked into this attitude and will not recover naturally. 
Chapter 9 
1. If the directional stability is very large and lateral stability small, then 
the aircraft will be prone to spiral instability. 
2. If the lateral stability is large and the directional stability small, then 
spiral instability will not be a problem. However, another problem may 
be encountered in which there is a motion consisting of a combined 
rolling and yawing oscillation (known as Dutch roll). 
486 MECHANICS OF FLIGHT 
3. In manually operated controls the aerodynamic forces acting on the 
control surface may make them very heavy to operate, especially at high 
speed. The use of suitable aerodynamic balancing can offset some of the 
hinge moment and make the control lighter to operate. 
4. Aerodynamic balance is used to reduce the aerodynamic hinge moment 
on the control. Mass balancing is used to alter the inertial characteristic 
of the control to change its dynamic behaviour and prevent flutter of the 
control surface. 
5. At high angles of attack, particularly, the down-going aileron produces 
a substantial increase in drag and hence yawing moment away from the 
intended turn. 
If the angle of attack is too high it may even be that the downward 
deflection of the aileron is sufficient to reduce the lift rather than 
increasing it because of stall. 
6. The yawing moment problem can be tackled by suitable design of the 
ailerons to ensure that the up-going aileron also produces a significant 
drag increment. A bigger rudder may also help. 
The use of a spoiler instead of, or supplementing, the up-going aileron 
will produce the desired drag increment and can be used to drop that 
wing significantly with respect to the other, even with no aileron control 
on either wing. 
7. The use of spoilers at low speed is explained above. They can also be a 
useful aid during the ground run on landing. At high speed they may be 
better than an aileron for roll control because they avoid imposing wing 
twist which is caused by the deflection of ailerons near the tips -- a 
problem which is particularly severe on swept wings. Tip ailerons at 
transonic Mach numbers may also cause undesirable local changes in 
flow due to compressibility effects. 
Chapter 11 
1. The speed of sound in water is roughly four times the speed of sound in air. 
2. The speed of sound reduces with height up to the stratosphere. It is pro- 
portional to the square root of the absolute air temperature, which 
reduces with height until the stratosphere is reached, where it remains 
approximately constant. 
3. The shock forms first at the region where the local flow first becomes 
supersonic. This is usually on the upper surface of the wing. 
487 
ANSWERS TO NON-NUMERICAL QUESTIONS 
4. The buffet boundary of a transonic aircraft is the Mach number at 
which an interaction between shock waves formed on the wing and the 
local boundary layer causes an unstable separation which causes a buf- 
feting on the aircraft. 
5. Mach number is air speed divided by the speed of sound. It is possible 
to talk of the Mach number at which an aircraft operates, or flight Mach 
number, as its true air speed divided by the speed of sound in the sur- 
rounding atmosphere. It is also possible to refer to a local Mach number 
relating to the flow over some particular part of the aircraft. This is the 
speed of the local flow divided by the local speed of sound. The local 
speed of sound will be different in different parts of the airflow because 
of temperature differences. 
The critical Mach number can be defined as the flight Mach number at 
which local supersonic flow first appears somewhere on the aircraft. 
A Mach meter is an instrument for measuring the flight Mach number 
of an aircraft. 
6. A shock wave causes a rapid increase in pressure as the air passes 
through it. On a wing it is therefore likely to reduce the extent of the 
suction peak on the upper surface. It may further modify the pressure 
distribution by causing flow separation. 
Chapter 12 
1. A Mach line is the trace of a weak pressure wave produced by a body in a 
supersonic airstream. Its angle to the flow, the Mach angle, depends only on 
the Mach number. A Mach cone is a three-dimensional surface consisting of 
Mach lines. For a small body in a supersonic airstream this surface is conical. 
2. Shock waves travel at a speed greater than the speed of sound. This 
means that a shock wave can form upstream of a body travelling at 
supersonic speed. 
3. An expansion wave in supersonic flow is a region where the speed 
increases while the pressure, density and temperature decrease. 
4. Sharp leading edges are used on supersonic wings to reduce the drag due 
to shock waves (the wave drag). 
5. At cruising Mach numbers above about 2, the structure may be subjected 
to aerodynamic heating to a degree which makes the use of conventional 
aluminium alloys impossible. In this case alternative materials such as 
titanium must be used at critical parts of the structure where heating is 
488 MECHANICS OF FLIGHT 
severe. In the Concorde the problem is solved by employing the fuel as a 
heat sink to reduce the local structural temperatures. 
6. In order to achieve low wave drag at supersonic speeds a slender wing (i.e. 
one which is long compared to its span) must be used. For efficient sub- 
sonic cruise a high aspect ratio wing is needed. This leads to the Concorde's 
highly swept 'ogee' planform. Because the high sweep leads to flow separ- 
ation, a sharp leading edge is used so the wing has separated flow over the 
top surface at nearly all flight conditions. This separation, however, is in 
the form of two well-controlled vortices above the wing which contribute 
to the lift and do not produce the buffet and increase in drag associated 
with the normal separation process leading to a conventional wing stall. 
Chapter 13 
1. Escape velocity is the velocity which is required by a body, with no 
assistance from propulsion, if it is to avoid being returned to the earth 
by gravitational attraction. The escape velocity required for a body 
starting on the earth's surface, and ignoring such important things as air 
resistance, can be calculated to be approximately 11.2 km/s. The escape 
velocity from the moon is less because the moon's mass, and hence grav- 
itational attraction, is less than that of the earth. 
2. Again, ignoring air resistance the escape velocity is the same for both 
horizontal and vertical launch, since the critical factor is the amount of 
kinetic energy possessed by the body. If we are clever, though, we can 
get part of the escape velocity on launch from the rotation of the earth 
if we launch near the equator and in the direction of rotation. 
3. For an elliptical orbit round the earth the perigee is the point on the 
orbit nearest the earth and the apogee is the point furthest away. 
4. This is the height at which the orbital period of the satellite is the same 
as the period of the earth's rotation. If the plane of the orbit is in the 
plane of the equator the satellite therefore remains stationary with 
respect to the earth's surface (called the geostationary orbit). This is 
clearly a help with communication satellites. 
5. (a) 1hr25min. 
(b) 2 hr approx. 
(c) 28 days. 
6. A satellite launched at the escape velocity has a parabolic path. Above 
this speed it is hyperbolic. 
489 
ANSWERS TO NON-NUMERICAL QUESTIONS 
absolute pressure 61 
acceleration 3, 9--10, 232--4 
centripetal 12--16, 233--4 
and gravity 6--7 
uniform 9 
advance per revolution 134--7 
aerobatics 247--53 
in adverse weather 255 
aerodynamic centre 87--90 
aerofoils 67--119, 412--30 
aerodynamic centre 87--90 
angle of attack 70, 72, 77, 78 
aspect ratio 99, 101 
camber 93--4, 97, 109 
centre of gravity 86--7, 92 
centre of pressure 74, 75--8, 80, 85--7, 91--2 
chord line 70, 330, 360 
circulation theory 106--8 
coefficients 80 
depth 92, 93--4 
design process 96--8 
fences 338 
high lift 111--12, 191--3 
icing problems 118--19 
laminar flow 94--5, 324--5 
nomenclature 96--8 
pitching moment 78--80, 85--7 
plan area 79 
power requirements 91 
pressure distribution 72--4 
pressure plotting 72 
reference point 86, 92 
slots 109--14, 191--2, 196--7 
spars 92 
stagnation point 74 
for supersonic speeds 351--2, 362--6 
total resultant force 75 
transition point 95 
variable camber 109 
and velocity 78 
vortices 100, 106 
see also flaps; lift; wing shapes 
Aeronautical Society of Great Britain 318 
ailerons 197, 243, 274, 277, 281--2 
aileron drag 281 
differential ailerons 283 
frise 283 
and high speed 285, 333--4 
slot--cum--aileron control 284 
air see atmosphere 
air brakes 116, 142, 192, 210 
and gliding 186 
air resistance 11, 381 
see also drag 
air speed 35--6 
and altitude 166, 223--4 
and the angle of attack 163--6 
and endurance flying 221 
and engine power 165--6, 222 
and landing 187, 189--90, 191, 194--7 
and level flight 162--6, 220--1 
maximum and minimum 220--1, 223 
measurement 40--2 
and tail planes 154 
throttle control 227, 289, 292 
and thrust 129, 130 
see also stalling 
air speed indicator 42--4, 313--14 
air to fuel mixture 167 
airflow 
at hypersonic speeds 373--4 
separation from wing surfaces 336--40 
shock waves 299, 300--5, 322--8, 342--6 
and the speed of sound 28 
Index 
airflow (continued) 
at subsonic speeds 68--70, 99, 106, 356 
at supersonic speeds 342--57 
visualisation 62--3 
airscrew see propeller propulsion 
altimeters 37--9 
altitude 
and air pressure and density 31 
and air speed 166, 223--4 
and the angle of attack 166 
ceiling 224--5 
and jet engine efficiency 227 
performance effects 222--4 
and propeller propulsion efficiency 171--2, 
226 
and range flying 171--2, 176 
and stalling speed 315--18 
American Federal units 8 
ammeter 288 
anemometers 62 
angle of attack 70, 72, 77, 78 
and air speed 163--6 
and gliding 181--3 
and landing 188--9, 192 
and level flight 163--6 
and supersonic airflow 351--2 
and tail planes 154 
anhedral 262, 264 
apogee 387 
approach to the landing ground 206--12, 294--5 
aquaplaning 210 
area rule 335--6 
artificial stabilisation systems 257 
aspect ratio 99, 101 
astronautics 377 
atmosphere 28--9 
chemical composition 36--7 
compressibility of air 22--3, 53, 298--9 
density of air 29--30, 31 
inertia properties of air 30 
ISA (International Standard Atmosphere) 
31--2, 37 
lower atmosphere 377 
mass of air 29--30 
pressure 30--1, 37, 38--9 
re-entry into the atmosphere 406--8 
seeing the air 29 
temperature changes 31--3, 34, 377--80 
up-and-down currents 34--5 
upper atmosphere 377--81 
viscosity properties of air 34 
attitude, and landing 192 
attraction forces 5, 381 
Autogiro 198 
balance unit 58--9 
balanced controls 274--80 
ballistics 377 
banking see turning and banking 
bar 21 
Bernoulli's equation 39--40 
bi-convex wing 363 
Blackbird spy-plane 124, 345 
blade angle 132, 134, 136, 143 
blown flaps 116, 197 
body forces 1, 2, 6 
body shapes see fuselage 
Boeing-Bell V22 Osprey 203 
boundary layer 50--2, 94--5, 305, 336--7 
at supersonic speeds 357 
brake power 130 
brakes 
air brakes 116, 142, 186, 192, 210 
wheel brakes 210--11 
British Imperial System 8 
buffet boundary 305 
bumpy weather 255 
Calibrated Air Speed (CAS) 43 
camber 93--4, 97, 109 
camber flaps 115 
canard configuration 152 
carburettor icing 289, 295 
catapulting 216 
ceiling 224--5 
centre of drag 148 
centre of gravity 25, 86--7, 92, 148, 149, 259, 
265 
centre of pressure 74, 75--8, 80, 85--7, 91--2, 
148 
centrifugal force 16 
centripetal acceleration 12--16, 233--4 
chemical composition of the atmosphere 36--7 
chord line 70, 330, 360 
Cierva Autogiro 198 
circular orbits 389--93 
circular velocity 387, 390--1, 393--4 
circulation theory 106--8 
climbing 147, 217--18, 230 
ceiling 224--5 
rate of climb 220--1, 291 
climbing turns 243--4 
cockpit 287--9 
see also instrumentation 
coefficients of aerofoils 80 
compound helicopters 202 
compressibility of air 22--3, 53, 298--9 
compressive airflow 347--8 
computational fluid dynamics (CFD) 64--5 
492 INDEX 
computer assisted landing 214 
Concorde 33, 149, 194, 329, 334, 360, 
371--2 
conservation of momentum principle 20 
constant-speed propellers 141 
contra-rotating propellers 143, 144, 146 
control 259, 273--86 
at low speed 280--5 
balanced controls 274--80 
control column 273--4, 285, 288 
directional control 273 
engine controls 227, 289, 292 
feel of pilots 334 
flutter 279 
foot pedals 274 
longitudinal control 273 
manual controls 274 
mass balance 279--80 
powered controls 274, 285--6, 334 
reversal of controls 333--4 
roll control 273 
rudder 274 
servo system 276--7 
at supersonic speeds 370--1 
throttle control 227, 289, 292 
and transonic speeds 333--4 
see also ailerons; elevators; flaps 
control column 273--4, 285, 288 
convergent--divergent nozzle 353--4 
cosmic rays 380 
critical Mach number 307--9, 325, 330--3 
Custer channel wing 197, 198 
degrees of stability 258 
delta wings 360 
density 21--2 
of air 29--30, 31 
and pressure 22, 33--4 
relative density 33 
and temperature 33--4 
depth of aerofoils 92, 93--4 
differential ailerons 283 
dihedral angle 260--1, 262--4 
directional control 273 
directional stability 268--73 
dive brakes 116 
diving 
nose-dives 251--2 
pulling-out 235--6 
dog-tooth 339 
downwash 155--6 
drag 1, 46--50, 52--4, 68, 78--80 
boundary layer drag 305 
centre of drag 148 
coefficient 52--4, 80, 91 
drag curve 83 
form drag 46--50 
induced drag 99--106 
and level flight 147--50, 156--60, 169--71 
lift/drag ratio 83--4, 91, 169--70 
minimisation 169--71, 175--6 
parasite drag 46 
profile drag 46 
shock drag 305 
skin friction 50--2 
and thrust 120 
at transonic speeds 309, 311--12 
wave drag 305 
wing drag 46 
droop-snoot 338 
Dutch roll 315 
dynamic pressure 40, 41, 42, 45 
dynamic stability 286 
ekranoplanes 205--6 
elevators 156, 273, 285 
and transonic flight 333 
elliptical orbits 394--6 
endurance flying 
and air speed 221 
and gliding 182, 185 
and jet propulsion 177 
and propeller propulsion 173--4 
energy 17--20 
and fuel efficiency 167--8 
kinetic energy 18 
and momentum 20 
potential energy 18 
energy--work conversion 167--8 
engine checks 292 
engine controls 227, 289, 292 
engine instruments 288 
engine power 165--6 
and air speed 222 
and performance 91, 218--22 
throttle control 227, 289, 292 
and transonic flight 311--12 
see also propulsion systems 
engine-assisted approach 211--12 
equilibrium forces 2--3 
Equivalent Air Speed (EAS) 43 
escape from the earth 382--4 
escape velocity 383, 393--4 
Eurofighter Typhoon 152 
Expanding--contracting duct 354--6 
expansion wave 350 
expansive airflow 340--50 
experimental mean pitch of a propeller 137--8 
493 
INDEX 
experimentation, and theories 318 
external forces 1--2 
fan jet engines 129--30 
feathered blades 142 
feel of pilots 334 
fences 338 
fin area 267 
fineness ratio 48 
First Law of Motion 1 
flaperons 197 
flaps 109--10, 115--16 
and landing 191--2, 196--7, 208--9 
leading-edge flaps 338 
and take-off 216 
and trim 212--14 
flat turns 245 
flattening out 209 
flight levels 39 
flight plans 289 
fluid pressure 20--1 
flutter 279 
flying wing 160 
foot pedals 274 
forces 
attraction forces 5, 381 
body forces 1, 2, 6 
centrifugal force 16 
centripetal force 12--16 
in equilibrium 2--3 
not in equilibrium 3--4 
external forces 1--2 
inertia forces 4, 16 
moment of a force 24--5, 150 
parallelogram of forces 24 
polygon of forces 24 
reactive forces 1--2 
triangle of forces 24 
units of measurement 2, 8 
as a vector quantity 23 
form drag 46--50 
forward-swept wings 268 
Fowler flaps 116, 118 
FREDA checks 292 
free-flight testing 320--1 
friction 50--2 
frise 283 
fuel checks 290 
fuel economy see range flying 
fuel instruments 288 
fuselage 
melting point 368 
slimness of design 308, 330 
and supersonic speeds 366--8 
g-forces 233--6 
gas law 22--3, 33 
gas turbine engines 121 
gauge pressure 61 
geometric pitch of a propeller 137--8 
gliding 180--6 
air brakes 186 
angle of attack 181--3 
efficiency of design 181 
endurance flying 182, 185 
weight effects 184--5 
gliding angle 182--3 
flat 185--6 
real and apparent 183 
gliding turns 243--4 
gravity 5, 381 
and acceleration 6--7 
and escape from the earth 382--4 
ground speed 35--6 
gyroplane 198 
gyroscopic effects 145 
Harrier 202--3, 206 
height see altitude 
helicopters 200--2 
helix angle 132, 134, 139 
high by-pass engines 129--30 
high lift aerofoils 111--12, 191--3 
high-speed wind tunnels 309, 318--20 
hold-off 209 
horizontal flight see level flight 
horizontal velocity 
and landing 186--7 
path of a projectile 384--6 
hot wire anemometer 62 
hovercraft 203--6 
hydraulic analogy 320, 345 
hypersonic speeds 124, 372--4 
icing problems 118--19 
carburettor icing 289, 295 
Indicated Air Speed (IAS) 43, 163, 170 
induced drag 99--106 
inertia forces 4, 16 
inertia and manoeuvrability 255 
inertia properties of air 30 
instrument error 43 
instrumentation 287--8 
air speed indicator 42--4, 313--14 
air speed measurement 40--2 
altimeters 37--9 
engine instruments 288 
fuel instruments 288 
instrument error 43 
494 INDEX 
Mach meters 44, 312--13 
navigation systems 44, 289 
pitot tube 41 
pitot-static tube 41--2 
turn and bank indicator 241--2 
venturi tube 44--6, 353--4 
inverted manoeuvres 252--3 
ionosphere 380 
ISA (International Standard Atmosphere) 
31--2, 37 
isothermal processes 22 
Jeans, Sir James 391 
jet engines 121--5, 129--30, 312 
efficiency at altitude 227 
and endurance flying 177 
and range flying 174--7 
see also propulsion systems 
jet flaps 116, 197 
jet lift aircraft 202--3 
jockey weights 59 
joystick 274, 288 
kinetic energy 18 
kinetic heating 368--70 
knots 8 
Krueger flaps 116 
laminar boundary layer 50--2 
laminar flow aerofoils 94--5, 324--5 
landing 186--214, 294--6 
air brakes 192, 210 
air speed 187 
angle of attack 188--9, 192 
approach to the landing ground 206--12, 
294--5 
attitude 192 
computer assisted 214 
engine-assisted approach 211--12 
and flaps 191--2, 196--7, 208--9 
flattening out 209 
high lift aerofoils 191--3 
hold-off 209 
horizontal velocity 186--7 
overshooting 208 
pulling-up 210 
short take-off and landing 198--203 
speed of landing 189--90, 191, 194--7 
stalling speed 190--1 
undershooting 208 
vertical take-off and landing 198--203 
vertical velocity 186, 188 
wind gradient 187--8 
wind speed 187 
wing loading 193--4, 196--7, 206 
laser Doppler anemometer (LDA) 62 
lateral axis 230 
lateral stability 262--4, 267, 272--3 
launching a space-craft 401--4 
launching speeds 382--4 
law of universal gravitation 381 
leading-edge droop 338 
leading-edge flaps 338 
level flight 147--79 
air speed 162--6, 220--1 
angle of attack 163--6 
drag 147--50, 156--60, 169--71 
endurance flying 173--4, 177, 221 
equilibrium conditions 148--9 
four forces 147--50, 156--60 
height effects 166 
lift 147--50, 156--60 
range flying 167--73, 174--7, 221 
rotation prevention 149 
tail planes 150--62 
and thrust 147--50, 156--60 
trimming 150 
weight effects 147--50, 156--60, 166--7 
lift 67--8, 78--80 
coefficient 80--1, 90--1 
high-lift devices 111--12, 191--3 
and level flight 147--50, 156--60 
lift curve 81 
lift/drag ratio 83--4, 91, 169--70 
and tail planes 151, 154, 156 
zero lift line 71, 76--7 
see also aerofoils 
lift dumpers 116, 212 
lifting bodies 374 
load factors 236 
loads 
during a turn 239--41 
on tail planes 154, 161--2 
on wings 193--4, 196--7, 206 
longitudinal axis 230 
longitudinal control 273 
longitudinal stability 259--61 
loops 234, 247--8 
inverted loops 253 
lower atmosphere 377 
Mach Angle 343--6 
Mach Cone 345, 358 
Mach Line 345, 350 
machmeter 44, 312--13 
Mach Numbers 305--9, 312--14, 325--7, 
330--3 
critical Mach Number 307--9, 325, 330--3 
495 
INDEX 
magnetos 289, 290 
manometers 22, 60--1, 72 
manual controls 274 
mass2,7,8 
of air 29--30 
mass balance control 279--80 
materials used in aeroplane construction 
368--70 
measurement see units of measurement 
melting points 368 
mesosphere 378 
meteorites 380 
meteorology 34 
millibars 21 
moment of a force 24--5, 150 
moment of inertia 255 
momentum 2, 12, 20 
conservation of momentum principle 20 
and thrust 127--9 
moon 
going to 396--401 
orbits 405--6 
returning from 406 
motion on curved paths 12 
NACA 96--8 
nautical mile 8 
Navier-Stokes equations 64--5 
navigation systems 44, 289 
neutral lift line 71 
neutral stability 257 
Newton 
First Law of Motion 1 
Second Law of Motion 3, 12 
Third Law of Motion 4 
newton metre 17, 168 
newtons (N) 2, 8 
nitrogen 36 
normal axis 230 
nose-dives 251--2 
pulling-out 235--6 
NOTAR helicopters 200 
oil flow technique 62--3 
orbits 
circular 389--93 
elliptical 294--6 
around the moon 405--6 
overshooting 208 
oxygen 36--7 
parallelogram of forces 24 
parasite drag 46 
Particle Image Velocimetry (PIV) 62 
pascal 21 
path of a projectile 384--6 
patterns and development of shock waves 
322--4 
performance 218--20 
altitude effects 222--4 
power requirements 219--20 
and weight 225--6 
perigee 388 
piston engines and altitude 171--2, 226 
pitch of a propeller 137--8, 139 
pitch angle 132, 134, 136 
variable pitch 141--2 
pitching 230 
pitching moment 78--80, 85--7, 260 
pitot tube 41 
pitot-static tube 41--2 
plan area 79 
plumb-bob 241 
polygon of forces 24 
potential energy 18 
pound mass 8 
pounds force 2 
power 17--20 
absorption 142--3 
measurement 17, 130 
and performance 91, 218--20 
and transonic flight 311--12 
see also engine power 
powered controls 274, 285--6, 334 
pre-flight checks 289--90 
pressure 
absolute pressure 61 
atmospheric pressure 30--1, 37, 38--9 
centre of pressure 74, 75--8, 80, 85--7, 
91--2, 148 
and density variation 22, 33--4 
distribution on aerofoils 72--4 
distribution of shock waves 324--8 
dynamic pressure 40, 41, 42, 45 
fluid pressure 20--1 
gauge pressure 61 
and lifting surfaces 67--70 
measurement 21, 60--2 
plotting 72 
sea-level atmospheric pressure 38--9 
stagnation pressure 40, 41 
static pressure 40, 41, 45 
pressure transducers 61--2 
pressurised cabins 33, 36--7 
profile drag 46 
projectiles 384--9 
propeller propulsion 127, 131--46 
advance per revolution 134--7 
496 INDEX 
altitude effects 171--2, 226 
blade angle 132, 134, 136, 143 
constant-speed propellers 141 
contra-rotating propellers 143, 144, 146 
efficiency 138--40, 311 
endurance flying 173--4 
engine checks 292 
feathered blades 142 
gyroscopic effects 145 
helix angle 132, 134, 139 
and high-speed flight 129, 311--12 
number of blades 142--3 
pitch of a propeller 137--8, 139 
pitch angle 132, 134, 136 
variable pitch 141--2 
power absorption 142--3 
power curves 218--20 
power measurement 130 
pusher propeller 131 
range flying 167--8 
resistance force 131 
shape of blades 142--3 
slipstream 143--4, 145 
solidity of propellers 143 
swing on take-off 145--6 
thrust force 131, 141 
tip speed 140--1 
torque forces 131, 145 
tractor propeller 131 
turboprop engines 122--3, 127, 226 
propulsion systems 121--46 
gas turbines 121 
high by-pass engines 129--30 
jet engines 121--5, 129--30, 174--7, 312 
and performance 227 
ram effect 121, 124 
ramjets 123--4, 355 
reciprocating engines 168 
rocket propulsion 125--7 
scramjets 124--5 
turbofans 129--30 
turbojets 121--2, 227 
turboprops 122--3, 127, 226 
turboshaft 122--3 
see also propeller propulsion 
pulling-out of dives 235--6 
pulling-up after landing 210 
pusher propeller 131 
quadrantal system 39 
radius of turn 246 
RAF (Royal Aircraft Factory) 96 
ram effect 121, 124 
ramjet engines 123--4, 355 
range flying 167--73, 174--7, 221 
air to fuel mixture 167 
altitude effects 171--2, 176 
drag minimisation 169--71, 175--6 
energy-work conversion 167--8 
jet propulsion 174--7 
propeller propulsion 167--8 
wind effects 173 
rate of climb 220--1, 291 
rate of roll 244--5 
re-entry into the atmosphere 406--8 
reactive forces 1--2 
reciprocating engines 168 
reference point 86, 92 
refuelling in the air 216 
relative density 33 
resistance see air resistance; drag; friction 
resistance force 131 
resultant moment 150 
reversal of controls 333--4 
Reynolds Number 320, 412, 431--4 
rocket propulsion 125--7 
launching a space-craft 401--4 
rocket-assisted take-off 216 
roll control 273 
rolling 250, 315 
rotation prevention 149 
Royal Aeronautical Society 318 
rudder controls 245--6, 274 
sailplanes 185 
satellites 384--9 
scale effects 63, 431--4 
schlieren method 302--4 
scramjet engines 124--5 
sea-level atmospheric pressure 38--9 
Second Law of Motion 3, 12 
seeding wind tunnels 62 
servo system 276--7 
shape of propeller blades 142--3 
shock drag 305 
shock stall 304--5, 315, 316--17 
shock waves 299, 300--5, 322--8, 342--6 
patterns and development 322--4 
pressure distribution 324--8 
sonic bangs 328--30 
stagnation point 324 
shooting stars 380 
short take-off and landing 198--203 
sideslipping 230, 250--1, 264 
skidding 230 
skin friction 50--2 
slab tailplanes 156, 333 
497 
INDEX 
slimness of design 308, 330 
slipstream 143--4, 145 
slot-cum-aileron control 284 
slots 109--14, 191--2, 196--7 
slug 8 
smoke tunnel 297 
solidity of propellers 143 
sonic bangs 328--30 
space flight 377--410 
circular orbits 389--93 
elliptical orbits 394--6 
escape from the earth 382--4 
going to the moon 396--401 
launching a spacecraft 401--4 
law of universal gravitation 381 
moon orbits 405--6 
projectiles 384--9 
re-entry into the atmosphere 406--8 
returning from the moon 406 
satellites 384--9 
sub-orbital flight 409--10 
upper atmosphere 377--81 
spars 92 
speed 
ground speed 35--6 
measurement 8, 36, 62 
see also air speed; velocity 
speed brakes 119 
speed of sound 28, 53, 297--309 
shock waves 299, 300--5, 322--8, 342--6 
temperature variations 307 
spins 248--9 
inverted spin 253 
Spitfire 308, 330 
spoilers 116, 284, 334 
spring tabs 277 
stability 257--73 
artificial stabilisation systems 257 
and centre of gravity 259, 265 
degrees of stability 258 
dihedral angle 260--1, 262--4 
directional stability 268--73 
dynamic stability 286 
fin area 267 
lateral stability 262--4, 267, 272--3 
longitudinal stability 259--61 
neutral stability 257 
pitching moment 260 
power-off/power-on conditions 258 
stick-fixed/stick-free conditions 258 
at supersonic speeds 370--1 
and the tail plane 260--1 
and wings 259, 265--6 
stagnation point 74, 324 
stagnation pressure 40, 41 
stalling 82--3, 110, 236, 281, 293 
and altitude 315--18 
shock stall 304--5, 315, 316--17 
speed 190--1, 315--18 
warning device 290 
starting vortex 106 
static pressure 40, 41, 45 
static thrust 141 
static tube 41--2 
stick pusher 285 
stick shaker 285 
stratosphere 31, 33, 377 
streamlining 46--50 
subsonic airflow 68--70, 99, 106, 356 
suction gauge 288 
supercharged engines 37 
supersonic speeds 28, 310--11, 342--76 
airflow 342--57 
body shapes 366--8 
boundary layer 357 
control 370--1 
kinetic heating 368--70 
Mach Angle 343--6 
Mach Cone 345, 358 
Mach Line 345, 350 
materials used in aeroplane construction 
368--70 
shock waves 342--6 
stability 370--1 
and temperature 368--70 
wing shapes 357--66 
surface heating 368--70 
surface skimming vehicles 203--6 
sweepback 267, 285, 330--3, 338, 357--60 
swing on take-off 145--6 
Système International (SI) 7--8 
tabs 277 
tachometer 288 
tail parachutes 210, 211 
tail planes 150--62, 260--1 
angle of attack 154 
conditions of balance 156--60 
downwash 155--6 
lift 151, 154, 156 
loads on 154, 161--2 
slab tailplanes 156, 333 
speed effects 154 
tail load 161--2 
trim tab 151, 276 
see also elevators 
tail-first aeroplanes 152 
tail-less aeroplanes 152 
498 INDEX 
tailerons 197 
take-off 147, 215--17, 291 
and flaps 216 
short take-off and landing 198--203 
swing on take-off 145--6 
vertical take-off and landing 198--203 
tapered wings 108--9 
taxying 291 
temperature 
atmospheric changes 31--3, 34, 377--80 
and density 33--4 
lapse rate 31 
melting points 368 
and the speed of sound 307 
and supersonic flight 368--70 
units of measurement 7 
terminal velocity 7 
test flights 320--1 
theories, and experimentation 318 
thermosphere 378 
thickened trailing edges 338 
Third Law of Motion 4 
throttle control 227, 289, 292 
thrust 1, 120, 131, 141 
and drag 120 
and level flight 147--50, 156--60 
and momentum 127--9 
and speed 129, 130 
static thrust 141 
see also propulsion systems 
thrust vectoring aircraft 202--3 
tilt-rotor aircraft 203 
tip speed 140--1 
tip stalling 332 
torque forces 131, 145 
total resultant force 75 
tractor propeller 131 
transition point 95 
transonic speeds 28, 297--340 
area rule 335--6 
and control 333--4 
drag rise 309, 311--12 
and elevators 333 
Mach numbers 305--9, 312--14, 325--7, 
330--3 
pilot's viewpoint 312--15 
power requirements 311--12 
shock stall 304--5, 315, 316--17 
shock waves 299, 300--5, 322--8 
sonic bangs 328--30 
speed of sound 28, 53, 297--309 
vortex generators 336--7 
triangle of forces 24 
trim 150, 212--14 
trim tab 151, 276 
tropopause 31, 33 
troposphere 31, 377 
True Air Speed (TAS) 43 
turbofan engines 129--30 
turbojet engines 121--2, 227 
turboprop engines 122--3, 127, 226 
turboshaft engines 122--3 
turbulent boundary layer 50--2 
turn and bank indicator 241--2 
turning and banking 236--46, 272--3, 293--4 
angles 239--42 
climbing turns 243--4 
flat turns 245 
gliding turns 243--4 
holding off bank 243 
loads during a turn 239--41 
plumb-bob 241 
radius of turn 246 
rate of roll 244--5 
rudder controls 245--6 
and wind direction 241 
U-tube manometer 22, 60--1, 72 
undercarriage 150, 192, 216 
wheel brakes 210--11 
undershooting 208 
uniform acceleration 9 
uniform velocity 9 
units of measurement 7--8 
American Federal units 8 
British Imperial System 8 
forces 2, 8 
mass 2, 8 
power 17 
pressure 21 
speed 8, 36 
Système International (SI) 7--8 
temperature 7 
work 17 
up-and-down air currents 34--5 
upper atmosphere 377--81 
upside-down flight 252--3 
variable camber 109 
variable sweep 361--2 
vector quantities 24 
velocity 2, 9--10, 78, 382--4 
circular velocity 387, 390--1, 393--4 
escape velocity 383, 393--4 
and the path of flight 384--6 
of the slipstream 143--4 
terminal velocity 7 
uniform velocity 9 
499 
INDEX 
velocity squared law 52--3 
venturi tube 44--6, 353--4 
vertical take-off and landing 198--203 
vertical velocity 186, 188 
viscosity properties of air 34 
vortex generators 336--7 
vortices 100, 106 
wash-out 283 
watt 17 
wave drag 305 
weather conditions 255 
weight 5--6 
and gliding 184--5 
and level flight 147--50, 156--60, 166--7 
mass weight 7 
and performance 225--6 
wheel brakes 210--11 
wind tunnels 55--9, 431--4 
balance unit 58--9 
errors in the model 63 
flow visualisation 62--3 
high-speed tunnels 309, 318--20 
interference from the walls 63 
jockey weights 59 
oil flow technique 62--3 
pressure measurement 60--2 
scale effects 63, 431--4 
seeding 62 
speed measurements 62 
types of 55--8, 319--20 
winds 34--6 
gradient 35, 187--8 
and range flying 173 
and turning and banking 241 
in the upper atmosphere 380 
wind speed 187 
wing drag 46 
wing loading 193--4, 196--7, 206 
wing shapes 
bi-convex 363 
delta 360 
flying wing 160 
forward-swept 268 
leading-edge droop 338 
and stability 259, 265--6 
and supersonic flight 357--66 
sweepback 267, 285, 330--3, 338, 357--60 
tapered 108--9 
thickened trailing edges 338 
variable sweep 361--2 
see also aerofoils 
wing-tip vortices 100, 106 
work 17--20, 167--8 
units of measurement 17 
Wright Flyer 152 
Yakovlev Yak 36 203 
yawing 230, 273, 315 
X15 374 
Zap flaps 116 
zero lift line 71, 76--7 
500 INDEX 