Skip to main content

web
texts
movies
audio
software
image
logo
search
 

upload
person
SIGN IN
ABOUT
CONTACT
BLOG
PROJECTS
HELP
DONATE
JOBS
VOLUNTEER
PEOPLE
Full text of "Indian Philosophy Vol. 1 By Radhakrishnan" 
See other formats 

GOVERNMENT OE INDIA 


DEPARTMENT OF ARCHAEOLOGY 

CENTRAL ARCHAEOLOGICAL 
LIBRARY 


Class 

Call No.JRL 409 Rn/j 





INDIAN PHILOSOPHY 




MUIRHEAD LIBRARY OF PHILOSOPHY 


An admirable statement of the aims of the Library of Philosophy was 
provided by the first editor, the late Professor H. J. Muirhead, in his 
description of the original programme printed in Erdman’s History of 
Philosophy under the date 1890. This was slightly modified in subsequent 
volumes to take the form of the following statement: 

“The Muirhead Library of Philosophy was designed as a contribution 
to the History of Modern Philosophy under the heads : first of different 
Schools of Thought — Sensationalist, Realist, Idealist, Intuitivist; se- 
condly of different Subjects — Psychology, Ethics, Aesthetics, Political 
Philosophy, Theology. While much had been done in England in tracing 
the course of evolution in nature, history, economics, morals and religion, 
little had been done in tracing the development of thought on these sub- 
jects. Yet ‘the evolution of opinion is part of the whole evolution.’ 

“By the co-operation of different writers in carrying out this plan it 
was hoped that a thoroughness and completeness of treatment, otherwise 
unattainable, might be secured. It was believed also that from writers 
mainly British and American fuller consideration of English Philosophy 
than it had hitherto received might be looked for. In the earlier series 
of books containing, among others, Bosanquet’s History of Aesthetics, 
Pfleiderer’s Rational Theology since Kant, Albee’s History of English 
Utilitarianism, Bonar’s Philosophy and Political Economy, Brett’s History 
of Psychology, Ritche’s Natural Rights, these objects were to a large ex- 
tent effected. 

“In the meantime original work of a high order was being produced 
both in England and America by such writers as Bradley, Stout, Bertrand 
Russell, Baldwin, Urban, Montague and others, and a new interest in 
foreign works, German, French and Italian, which had either become 
classical or were attracting public attention, had developed. The scope 
of the Library thus became extended into something more international, 
and it is entering on the fifth decade of its existence in the hope that it 
may contribute to that mutual understanding between countries which 
is so pressing a need of the present time.” 

The need which Professor Muirhead stressed is no less pressing today, 
and few will deny that philosophy has much to do with enabling us to 
meet it, although no one, least of all Muirhead himself, would regard 
that as the sole, or even the main, object of philosophy. As Professor 
Muirhead continues to lend the distinction of his name to the Library of 
Philosophy, it seemed not inappropriate to allow him to recall us to these 
aims in his own words. The emphasis on the history of thought seemed 
to me also very timely ; and the number of important works promised for 
the Library in the near future augur well for the continued fulfilment, in 
this and in other ways, of the expectations of the original editor. 


PI. D. LEWIS 



MUIRHEAD LIBRARY OF PHILOSOPHY 

General Editor, Professor H. D. Lewis 
Professor of Philosophy, University College, Bangor 

THE ANALYSIS OF MIND By Bertrand Russell 6th Impression 
ANALYTIC PSYCHOLOGY By Prof G. F. Stout Two Vols 5th Impression 
ATTENTION By Prof W. B. Pillsbury 2nd Impression 
COLERIDGE AS PHILOSOPHER By Prof J. H. Muirhead 

CONTEMPORARY AMERICAN PHILOSOPHY Edited by Prof George 
P. Adams and Prof Wm Pepperell Montague Two Vols 

CONTEMPORARY BRITISH PHILOSOPHY Edited by Prof J. H. Muir- 
head Two Vols in One 3 rd Impression 
CONTEMPORARY INDIAN PHILOSOPHY Edited by Radhakrishnan 
and Prof J. H. Muirhead 

DIALOGUES ON METAPHYSICS By Nicholas Malebranche Translated 
by Morris Ginsberg 

ELEMENTS OF CONSTRUCTIVE PHILOSOPHY By Prof J. S. 
Mackenzie 2nd Impression 

ETHICS By Nicholai Hartmann Translated by Stanton Coit Three Vols 
GOD AND PERSONALITY By Prof Clement C. J. Webb 3 rd Impression 
THE GOOD WILL: A STUDY IN THE COHERENCE THEORY OF 
GOODNESS By Prof H. J. Paton 

THE GREAT PROBLEMS By Bernardino Varisco Translated by Prof R. C. 
Lodge 

HEGEL: A RE-EXAMINATION By J. N. Findlay 

HEGEL’S SCIENCE OF LOGIC Translated by IF. H. Johnston and L. G. 
Struthers Two Vols 2nd Impression 

HISTORY OF AESTHETIC By Dr B. Bosanquet 4 th Edition 5th 
Impression 

HISTORY OF ENGLISH UTILITARIANISM By Prof E. Albee 
HISTORY OF PPIILOSOPHY By J. E. Erdmann 

Vol. I Ancient and Mediaeval 5th Impression 
Vol. II Modern 6 th Impression 
Vol. Ill Since Hegel yth Impression 

HISTORY OF PSYCHOLOGY By Prof G. S. Brett Edited by R. S. Peters 
Abridged one volume edition 
HUMAN KNOWLEDGE By Bertrand Russell 

A HUNDRED YEARS OF BRITISH PHILOSOPHY By Dr Rudolf Metz 
Translated by Prof J. IF. Harvey, Prof T. E. Jessop, Henry Sturt 2nd 
Impression 

IDEAS: A General Introduction to Pure Phenomenology By Edmund 
Husserl Translated by IF. R. Boyce Gibson 
IDENTITY AND REALITY By Emile Meyerson Translated by Kate 
Loeivenberg 

INDIAN PHILOSOPHY By Radhakrishnan Two Vols Rev 2nd Edition 
THE INTELLIGIBLE WORLD: METAPHYSICS AND VALUE By 
Prof W. M. Urban 

INTRODUCTION TO MATHEMATICAL PHILOSOPHY By Bertrand 
Russell 2nd Edition 8th Impression 
KANT’S METAPHYSIC OF EXPERIENCE By Prof H. J. Paton 
KNOW THYSELF By Bernardino Varisco Translated by Dr Guglielmo 
Salvadori 


LANGUAGE AND REALITY By Wilbur Marshall Urban 
MATTER AND MEMORY By Henri Bergson Translated by N. M. Paul 
and W. S. Palmer 6th Impression 

MODERN PHILOSOPHY' By Guido de Ruggiero Translated by A. Howard 
Hannay and R. G. Collingwood 

THE MODERN PREDICAMENT By Prof H. J. Paton 
MORAL SENSE By James Bonar 
NATURAL RIGHTS By D. G. Ritchie 3rd Edition 
NATURE, MIND AND MODERN SCIENCE By E. Harris 
THE NATURE OF THOUGHT By Brand Blanshard, B.Sc., Ph.D. 2nd 
Impression 

ON SELFHOOD AND GODHOOD By C. A. Campbell 
THE PHENOMENOLOGY OF MIND By G. W. F. Hegel Translated by 
Sir James Baillie Revised 2nd Edition 3rd Impression 
PHILOSOPHY AND POLITICAL ECONOMY By J. Bonar 4th Impression 

THE PLATONIC TRADITION IN ANGLO-SAXON PHILOSOPHY By 
Prof J. H. Muirhead 

THE PRINCIPAL UPANISADS By Radhakrishnan 
THE PROBLEMS OF PERCEPTION By R. J. Hirst 
SOME MAIN PROBLEMS OF PHILOSOPHY By G. E. Moore 
A THEORY OF DIRECT REALISM; and the Relation of Realism to 
Idealism By J. E. Turner 

THE WAYS OF KNOWING: or, The Methods of Philosophy By Prof 
W. P. Montague 4 th Impression 

TIME AND FREE WILL By Prof Henri Bergson Translated by F. G. 
Pogson 6th Impression 



ftbe flbmrbeab QLibrarv of philosophy 


INDIAN PHILOSOPHY 


by Radhakrishnan 


RECOVERY OF FAITH 

EAST AND WEST 

THE PRINCIPAL UPANISADS 

RELIGION AND SOCIETY 

THE BHAGAVADGlTA 

THE HINDU VIEW OF LIFE 

AN IDEALIST VIEW OF LIFE 

EAST AND WEST IN RELIGION 
(George Allen & Unwin) 

EASTERN RELIGIONS AND WESTERN 
THOUGHT 
(Clarendon Press, Oxford)' 

THE DHAMMAPAD'A 
(Oxford University Press) 

INDIA AND CHINA 

IS THIS PEACE? 

GREAT INDIANS 

(Hind Kitabs, Bombay) 

Edited by Radhakrishnan 

MAHATMA GANDHI: ESSAYS AND REFLECTIONS 
ON HIS WORK ' 

HISTORY OF PHILOSOPHY EASTERN 
AND WESTERN 
(George Allen &■ Unwin) 

Edited by Radhakrishnan and J. H. Muirhead 

CONTEMPORARY INDIAN PHILOSOPHY 
(Library of Philosophy) 

(George Allen <S- Unwin) 

by A. N. Marlow 

RADHAKRISHNAN: AN ANTHOLOGY 

(George Allen & Unwin) 



INDIAN PHILOSOPHY 

BY 


RADHAKRISHNAN 



NEW YORK: THE MACMILLAN COMPANY 
LONDON GEORGE ALLEN & UNWIN LTD 


FIRST PUBLISHED IN I923 
SECOND EDITION, I929 
INDIAN EDITION, I94O 
FOURTH IMPRESSION, 1 94 1 
FIFTH IMPRESSION, 1948 
SIXTH IMPRESSION, 1 95 1 
SEVENTH IMPRESSION, 1 956 
EIGHTH IMPRESSION, 1958 


This hook is copyright under the Berne Convention. 
Apart from any fair dealing for the purposes of 
private study, research, criticism or review, as 
permitted under the Copyright Act, 1956, no 
portion may be reproduced by any process without 
written permission. Enquiry should be made tc 
the publishers 


•» \ T 


LlBBAi 
Ao«. Ko 


Date 

Call 


i\ i_\\ DEi-Hl. 

f) 

If / h?** J 


PRINTED IN GREAT BRITAIN 
in ii point Old Style type 


BY UNWIN BROTHERS LIMITED 
WOKING AND LONDON 



PREFACE TO THE SECOND EDITION 


It is a pleasure to know that a new edition of this book is 
''‘called for. It shows that, with all its defects, it has helped to 
rouse interest in Indian philosophy. I have not made many 
alterations in the text, but have added explanatory notes 
intended to clear difficulties, and an Appendix which deals 
with some of the controversial issues in the field of Indian 
thought raised by the first volume. My thanks are due to 
the Editor of Mind for his courtesy in permitting me to use 
in the Appendix the substance of an article which originally 
appeared in his pages (April 1926). 

In preparing this edition, I have been considerably assisted 
by the suggestions of my friend Piofessor M. Hiriyanna of 
Mysore. 



PREFACE 


Though the world has changed considerably in its outward 
material aspect, means of communication, scientific inven- 
tions, etc., there has not been any great change in its inner 
spiritual side. The old forces of hunger and love, and the 
simple joys and fears of the heart, belong to the permanent 
stuff of human nature. The true interests of humanity, 
the deep passions of religion, and the great problems of 
philosophy, have not been superseded as material things 
have been. Indian thought is a chapter of the history 
of the human mind, full of vital meaning for us. The ideas 
of great thinkers are never obsolete. They animate the 
progress that seems to kill them. The most ancient fancies 
sometimes startle us by their strikingly modern character, 
for insight does not depend on modernity. 

Ignorance of the subject of Indian thought is profound. 
Jo the modern mind Indian philosophy means two or three 
? silly” notions about may a, or the delusiveness of the world, 
\arma, or belief in fate, and tydga, or the ascetic desire 
Jo be rid of the flesh. Even these simple notions, it is 

H' 

Said, are wrapped up in barbarous nomenclature and 
cjhaotic clouds of vapour and verbiage, looked upon by 
Jfcie “ natives ” as wonders of intellect. After a six-months’ 
%)ur from Calcutta to Cape Comorin, our modern aesthete 
dismisses the whole of Indian culture and philosophy as 
3 pantheism,” “ worthless scholasticism,” “ a mere play upon 
yords,” “ at all events nothing similar to Plato or Aristotle, 



8 


INDIAN PHILOSOPHY 


or even Plotinus or Bacon.” The intelligent student inter- 
ested in philosophy will, however, find in Indian thought 
an extraordinary mass of material which for detail and 
variety has hardly any equal in any other part of the world. 
There is hardly any height of spiritual insight or rational 
philosophy attained in the world that has not its parallel 
in the vast stretch that lies between the early Vedic seers 
and the modem Naiyayikas. Ancient India, to adapt Pro- 
fessor Gilbert Murray’s words in another context, “ has the 
triumphant, if tragic, distinction of beginning at the very 
bottom and struggling, however precariously, to the very 
summits .” 1 The naive utterances of the Vedic poets, the 
wondrous suggestiveness of the Upanisads, the marvellous 
psychological analyses of the Buddhists, and the stupendous 
system of Samkara, are quite as interesting and instructive 
from the cultural point of view as the systems of Plato 
and Aristotle, or Kant and Hegel, if only we study them 
in a true scientific frame of mind, without disrespect for the 
past or contempt for the alien. The special nomenclature 
of Indian philosophy which cannot be easily rendered into 
English accounts for the apparent strangeness of the 
intellectual landscape. If the outer difficulties are over- 
come, we feel the kindred throb of the human heart, which 
because human is neither Indian nor European. Even if 
Indian thought be not valuable from the cultural point of 
view, it is yet entitled to consideration, if on no other ground, 
at least by reason of its contrast to other thought systems 
and its great influence over the mental life of Asia. 

In the absence of accurate chronology, it is a misnomer 
to call anything a history. Nowhere is the difficulty of 
getting reliable historical evidence so extreme as in the 
case of Indian thought. The problem of determining the 
exact dates of early Indian systems is as fascinating as it 


* Four Stages of Greek Religion, p. 15. 



PREFACE 


9 


is insoluble, and it has furnished a field for the wildest 
hypotheses, wonderful reconstruction and bold romance. 
The fragmentary condition of the material from out of 
which history has to be reconstructed is another obstacle. 
In these circumstances I must hesitate to call this work 
a History of Indian Philosophy. 

In interpreting the doctrines of particular systems, I 
have tried to keep in close touch with the documents, give 
wherever possible a preliminary survey of the conditions 
that brought them into being, and estimate their indebtedness 
to the past as well as their contribution to the progress 
of thought. I have emphasised the essentials so as to pre- 
vent the meaning of the whole from being obscured by 
details, and attempted to avoid starting from any theory. 
Yet I fear I shall be misunderstood. The task of the historian 
is hard, especially in philosophy. However much he may 
try to assume the attitude of a mere chronicler and let the 
history in some fashion unfold its own inner meaning and 
continuity, furnish its own criticism of errors and partial 
insights, still the judgments and sympathies of the writer 
cannot long be hidden. Besides, Indian philosophy offers 
another difficulty. We have the commentaries which, being 
older, come nearer in time to the work commented upon. 
The presumption is that they will be more enlightening 
about the meaning of the texts. But when the com- 
mentators differ about their interpretations, one cannot 
stand silently by without offering some judgment on the 
conflict of views. Such personal expressions of opinion, 
however dangerous, can hardly be avoided. Effective 
exposition means criticism and evaluation, and I do not 
think it is necessary to abstain from criticism in order that 
I may give a fair and impartial statement. I can only 
hope that the subject is treated in a calm and dispassionate 
way, and that whatever the defects of the book, no 



10 INDIAN PHILOSOPHY 

attempt is made to wrest facts to suit a preconceived 
opinion. My aim has been not so much to narrate Indian 
views as to explain them, so as to bring them within the 
focus of Western traditions of thought. The analogies and 
parallels suggested between the two thought systems are 
not to be pressed too far, in view of the obvious fact that 
the philosophical speculations of India were formulated 
centuries ago, and had not behind them the brilliant achieve- 
ments of modem science. 

Particular parts of Indian philosophy have been studied 
with great care and thoroughness by many brilliant scholars 
in India, Europe and America. Some sections of philosophi- 
cal literature have also been critically examined, but there 
has been no attempt to deal with the history of Indian 
thought as an undivided whole or a continuous develop- 
ment, in the light of which alone different thinkers and 
views can be fully understood. To set forth the growth of 
Indian philosophy from the dim dawn of history in its true 
perspective is an undertaking of the most formidable kind, 
and it certainly exceeds the single grasp of even the most 
industrious and learned scholar. Such a standard encyclo- 
paedia of Indian philosophy requires not only special aptitude 
and absolute devotion, but also wide culture and intelligent 
co-operation. This book professes to be no more than 
a general survey of Indian thought, a short outline of a 
vast subject. Even this is not quite easy. The necessary 
condensation imposes on the author a burden of responsibility, 
which is made more onerous by the fact that no one man 
can attempt to be an authority on all these varied fields of 
study, and that the writer is compelled to come to decisions 
on evidence which he himself cannot carefully weigh In 
matters of chronology, I have depended almost entirely 
on the results of research carried on by competent scholars. 
I am conscious that in surveying this wide field, much of 



PREFACE 


11 


interest is left untouched, and still more only very roughly 
sketched in. This work has no pretensions to completeness 
in any sense of the term. It attempts to give such a general 
statement of the main results as shall serve to introduce 
the subject to those to whom it may not be known, and 
awaken if possible in some measure that interest for it to 
which it is so justly entitled. Even if it proves a failure, 
it may assist or at least encourage other attempts. 

My original plan was to publish the two volumes together. 
Kind friends like Professor J. S. Mackenzie suggested to 
me the desirability of bringing out the first volume immedi- 
ately. Since the preparation of the second volume would 
take some time and the first is complete in itself, I venture 
to publish it independently. A characteristic feature of 
many of the views discussed in this volume is that they 
are motived, not so much by the logical impulse to account 
for the riddles of existence, as by the practical need for a 
support in life. It has been difficult to avoid discussions 
of, what may appear to the reader, religious rather than 
philosophical issues, on account of the very close connexion 
between religion and philosophy in early Indian speculation. 
The second volume, however, will be of a more purely 
philosophical character, since a predominantly theoretical 
interest gets the upper hand in the darianas or systems of 
philosophy, though the intimate connexion between know- 
ledge and life is not lost sight of. 

It is a pleasure to acknowledge my obligations to the 
many eminent orientalists whose works have been of great 
help to me in my studies. It is not possible to mention 
all their names, which will be found in the course of the 
book. Mention must, however, be made of Max Muller, 
Deussen, Keith, Jacobi, Garbe, Tilak, Bhandarkar, Rhys 
Davids and Mrs. Rhys Davids, Oldenberg, Poussin, Suzuki 
and Sogen. 


VOL. I 


1 



12 INDIAN PHILOSOPHY 

Several valuable works of recent publication, such as 
Professor Das Gupta’s History of Indian Philosophy and 
Sir Charles Eliot’s Hinduism and Buddhism, came to hand 
too late for use, after the MS. had been completed and sent 
to the publishers in December 1921. The bibliography 
given at the end of each chapter is by no means exhaustive. 
It is intended mainly for the guidance of the English reader. 

My thanks are due to Professor J. S. Mackenzie and 
Mr. V. Subrahmanya Aiyar, who were good enough to read 
considerable parts of the MS. and the proofs. The book 
has profited much by their friendly and suggestive counsel. 
I am much indebted to Professor A. Berriedale Keith for 
reading the proofs and making many valuable comments. 
My greatest obligation, however, is to the Editor of the 
Library of Philosophy, Professor J. H. Muirhead, for his 
invaluable and most generous help in the preparation of 
the book for the press and previously. He undertook the 
laborious task of reading the book in the MS., and his sugges- 
tions and criticisms have been of the greatest assistance 
to me. I am also obliged to Sir Asutosh Mookerjee, Kt., 
C.S.I., for his constant encouragement and the facilities 
provided for higher work in the Post-Graduate Department 
of the Calcutta University. 

November 1922. 



14 


INDIAN PHILOSOPHY 


Minor gods and goddesses — Classification of the Vedic deities — 
Monotheistic tendencies — The unity of nature — -The unifying 
impulse of the logical mind — The implications of the religious 
consciousness — Henotheism — Visvakarman, Brhaspati, Praja- 
pati and Hiranyugarbha — The rise of reflection and criticism — 
The philosophical inadequacy of monotheism — Monism — Phil- 
osophy and religion — The cosmological speculations of the Vedic 
hymns — The Nasadlya Sukta — The relation of the world to 
the Absolute — The Purusa Sukta — Practical religion — Prayer — 
Sacrifice — The ethical rules — Karma — Asceticism — Caste — • 
Future life — The two paths of the gods and the fathers — Hell — 
Rebirth — Conclusion. 


CHAPTER III 

Transition to the Upanisads 

The general character of the Atharva-Veda — Conflict of cultures 
— The primitive religion of the Atharva-Veda — Magic and mys- 
ticism — The Yajur-Veda — The Briihmanas — Their religion of 
sacrifice and prayer — The dominance of the priest — The authori- 
tativeness of the Veda — Cosmology — Ethics — Caste — Future life. 

CHAPTER IV 

The Philosophy of the Upani?ads. 

Introduction — The fluid and indefinite character of the teaching 
of the Upanisads — Western students of the Upanisads — Date 
—Early Upanisads — The great thinkers of the age — The hymns 
of the Rg-Veda and the doctrine of the Upanisads compared— 
Emphasis on the monistic side of the hymns — The shifting of the 
centre from the object to the subject — The pessimism of the 
Upanisads — The pessimistic implications of the conception of 

samsara — Protest against the externalism of the Vedic religion 

Subordination of the Vedic knowledge — The central problems of 
the Upanisads — Ultimate reality — The nature of Atman dis- 
tinguished from body, dream consciousness and empirical self 

The different modes of consciousness, waking, dreaming, dreamless 
sleep and ecstasy — The influence of the Upanisad analysis 
of self on subsequent thought — The approach to reality from 
the object side — Matter, life, consciousness, intelligence and 

ananda — Saihkara and Ramanuja on the status of ananda 

Brahman and Atman — Tat tvam asi — The positive character of 

Brahman — Intellect and intuition — Brahman and the world 

Creation — The doctrine of maya — Deussen^s view examined"— 
Degrees of reality — Are the Upanisads pantheistic ? — The finite 

self — The ethics of the Upanisads — The nature of the ideal The 

metaphysical warrant for an ethical theory — Moral life Its 

general features — Asceticism — Xntellcctualism — Jnana, Karma 

and Upasana — Morality and religion — Beyond good and evil 

The religion of the Upanisads — Different forms— The highest 
state of freedom — The ambiguous accounts of it in the Upanisads 
—Evil— Sufiering— Karma— Its value— The problem of freedom 



CONTENTS 


15 


PAG* 

— Future life and immortality — Psychology of the Upanisads — 
Non-Yedantic tendencies in the Upanisads — Samkhya — Yoga 
— Nyaya — General estimate of the thought of the Upanisads 
— Transition to the epic period. 


PART 11 

THE EPIC PERIOD 
CHAPTER V 


Materialism ....... 271 

The epic period 600 B.c. to a.d. 200 — Intellectual stir — Freedom 
of thought — The influence of the Upanisads — The political 
conditions of the time — The many-sided philosophic activity 
of the epic period — The three chief tendencies of ethical revolt, 
religious reconstruction and systematic philosophy — Common 
ideas of the age — Materialism — Its antecedents — Lokayata — 
Theory of knowledge — Matter the only reality — Body and mind 
— No future life — No God — Hedonistic ethics — The repudiation 
of the authority of the Vedas — The effects of the theory — Later 
criticism of materialism. 

CHAPTER VI 

The Pluralistic Realism of the Jainas . . . 286 

Jainism — Life of Vardhamana — Division into ^vetambaras and 
Digambaras — Literature — Relation to Buddhism — The Samkhya 
philosophy and the Upanisads — Jaina logic — Five kinds of 
knowledge — The Nayas and their divisions — Saptabhahgl — 
Criticism of the Jaina theory of knowledge — Its monistic implica- 
tions — The psychological views of the Jainas — Soul — Body and 
mind — Jaina metaphysics — Substance and quality — Jlva and 
ajxva — Aka^a, Dharma and Adharma — Time — Matter — The 
atomic theory — Karma — LeSyas — Jlvas and their kinds — Jaina 
ethics — Human freedom — Ethics of Jainism and of Buddhism 
compared — Caste — Sangha — Attitude to God — Religion — 
Nirvana — A critical estimate of the Jaina philosophy. 

CHAPTER VII 

The Ethical Idealism of Early Buddhism , . 341 

Introduction — The evolution of Buddhist thought — Literature 
of early Buddhism — The three Pifakas — Questions of King 
Milinda — Visuddhimagga — Life and personality of Buddha — 
Conditions of the time — The world of thought — The futility of 



CONTENTS 


Preface to Second Edition . 
Preface . 


CHAPTER I 


Introduction ....... 

General characteristics of Indian philosophy — The natural situa- 
tion of India — The dominance of the intellectual interest — The 
individuality of Indian philosophy — The influence of the West — 
The spiritual character of Indian thought — Its close relation to life 
and religion — The stress on the subjective — Psychological basis 
of metaphysics — Indian achievements in positive science — 
Speculative synthesis and scientific analysis — The brooding East 
— Monistic idealism — Its varieties, non-dualism, pure monism, 
modified monism and implicit monism — God is all — The in- 
tuitional nature of philosophy — DarSana — Samkara’s qualifications 
of a candidate for the study of philosophy — The constructive 
conservatism of Indian thought — The unity and continuity of 
Indian thought — Consideration of some charges levelled against 
Indian philosophy, such as pessimism, dogmatism, indifference 
to ethics and unprogressive character — The value of the study of 
Indian philosophy — The justification of the title " Indian Phil- 
osophy ” — Historical method — The difficulty of a chronological 
treatment — The different periods of Indian thought — Vedic, epic, 
systematic and scholastic — “ Indian " histories of Indian 
philosophy. 


PART I 

THE VEDIC PERIOD 
CHAPTER II 

The Hymns of the Rg-Veda . 

The four Vedas — The parts of the Veda, the Mantras, the 
Brahmanas, the Upanisads — The importance of the study of 
the hymns — Date and authorship — Different views of the teaching 
of the hymns — Their philosophical tendencies — Religion — 
“ Deva " — Naturalism and anthropomorphism — Heaven and 
Earth — Varuija — Rta — Surya — Usas — Soma — Yama — Indra — 



16 


INDIAN PHILOSOPHY 


T ASS 


metaphysics — The state of religion — Moral life — Ethics inde- 
pendent of metaphysics and theology — The positivist method 
of Buddha — His rationalism — Religion within the bounds of 
reason — Buddhism and the Upanisads — The four truths — The 
first truth of suffering — Is Buddhism pessimistic ? — The second 
truth of the causes of suffering — Impermanence of things — 
Ignorance — The dynamic conception of reality — Bergson — 
Identity of objects and continuity of process — Causation — Im- 
permanence and momentariness — The world order — Being and 
becoming in the Upanisads and early Buddhism — Aristotle, 
Kant and Bergson — Samkara on the ksanikavada — The nature 
of becoming — Is it objective or only subjective ? — External 
reality — Body and mind — The empirical individual — Nairatmya- 
vada — Nature of the Atman — N agasena’s theory of the soul — Its 
resemblance to Hume’s — The nature of the subject — Sar'nkara and 
Kant — Buddhist psychology — Its relation to modern psychology 
— Sense perception — Affection, will and knowledge — Association 
— Duration of mental states — Subconsciousness — Rebirth — 
Pratityasamutpada — Nidanas — Avidya and the other links in 
the chain — The place of avidya in Buddha’s metaphysics — The 
ethics of Buddhism — Its psychological basis — Analysis of the 
act — Good and evil — The middle path — The eightfold way — 
Buddhist Dhyana and the Yoga philosophy — The ten fetters — 
The Arhat — Virtues and vices — The motive of moral life — The in- 
wardness of Buddhist morality — The charge of intellectualism — 
The complaint of asceticism — The order of mendicants — Sangha 
— Buddha’s attitude to caste and social reform — The authority 
of the Vedas — The ethical significance of Karma — Karma and 
freedom — Rebirth — Its mechanism — Nirvana — Its nature and 
varieties — The Nirvana of Buddhism and the Moksa of the 
Upanisads — God in early Buddhism — The criticism of the tradi- 
tional proofs for the existence of God — The absolutist implica- 
tions of Buddhist metaphysics — The deification of Buddha — 
Compromises with popular religion — Buddhist theory of know- 
ledge — Buddha's pragmatic agnosticism — Buddha’s silence on 
metaphysical problems — Kant and Buddha — The inevitability 
of metaphysics — The unity of thought between Buddhism and 
the Upanisads — Buddhism and the Samkhya theory — Success 
of Buddhism. 


CHAPTER VIII 

Epic Philosophy ...... 477 

The readjustment of Brahmanism — The epics — The Mahabharata 
— Date — Its importance — The Ramayapa — The religious ferment 
— The common philosophical ideas — Durga worship — Pasupata 
system — Vasudeva-Krsna cult — Vaisnavism — Pancaratra re- 
ligion — The suspected influence of Christianity — The Cosmo- 
logy of the Mahabharata — The Samkhya ideas in the Mahabha- 
rata — Gunas — Psychology — Ethics — Bhakti — Karma — Future 
life — Later Upanisads — The SvetaSvatara Upanisad — The 
Code of Manu — Date — Cosmology and Ethics. 



CONTENTS 17 

CHAPTER IX 

_ PAGE 

The Theism of the BhagavadgIta .... 519 

The importance of the Gita in Indian thought — Its universal 
significance — Date — Relation to the Mahabharata — The Vedas — 

The Upanisads — Buddhism — The Bhagavata religion — The Sarii- 
khya and the Yoga — Indian commentaries on the Gita — The Gita 
ethics is based on metaphysics — The problem of reality — 'The 
real in the objective and the subjective worlds — Brahman and 
the world — Purusottama — Intuition and thought — Higher and 
lower prakrti — The avataras — The nature of the universe — Maya 
— Creation — The individual soul — Plurality of souls — Rebirth — 

The ethics of the Gita — Reason, will and emotion — Jfiana marga 
— Science and philosophy — Patafijali's Yoga — The Jnani — • 

Bhakti marga — The personality of God — The religious conscious- 
ness — Karma marga — The problem of morality — The moral 
standard — Disinterested action — Gunas — The Vedic theory of 
sacrifices — Caste — Is work compatible with moksa ? — The 
problem of human freedom — The integral life of spirit— 
Ultimate freedom and its character. 


CHAPTER X 

Buddhism as a Religion , . . 581 

The history of Buddhism after the death of Buddha — Atoka — 

The Mahayana and the HInayana — Northern and southern 
Buddhism — Literature — HInayana doctrines — Metaphysics, 
ethics and religion — The rise of the Mahayana — Its monistic meta- 
physics — The religion of the Mahayana — Its resemblance to the 
BhagavadgIta — The ethics of the Mahayana — The ten stages — 
HInayana and Mahayana ethics compared — Nirvana — Decline 
of Buddhism — The effects of Buddhism on Indian thought. 


CHAPTER XI 

The Schools of Buddhism . . . . .611 

Introduction — The four schools of realism and idealism — 

The Vaibhasikas — Nature of reality — Knowledge — Psychology 
— The Sautrantikas — Knowledge of the external world — God and 
Nirvana — The Yogacaras — Their theory of knowledge — Nature 
of Alayavijnana — Subjectivism — Criticism of it by Samkara and 
Kumarila — Individual self — Forms of knowledge — The Yoga- 
cara theory of the world — Avidya and Alaya — Nirvana — 
Ambiguity of Alayavijaana — The Madhyamikas — Literature — ■ 

The Madhyamika criticism of the Yogacara — Phenomenalism 
— Theory of relations — Two kinds of knowledge — Absolutism— 
Sunyavada — Nirvana — Ethics — Conclusion. 



18 INDIAN PHILOSOPHY 

Appendix ....... 

The Method of Approach — The Comparative Standpoint — The 
Upanisads — Early Buddhism — The Negative, The Agnostic and 
the Positive Views — Early Buddhism and the Upanisads — The 
Schools of Buddhism — Nagarj una’s Theory of Reality — Sunya- 
vada and the Advaita Vedanta. 


Notes . 
Index . 


page 

671 

705 

725 



LIST OF ABBREVIATIONS 


A.V. . 


Atharva-Veda. 

B.G, . 


Bhagavadgita. 

E.R.E. 


Encyclopaedia of Religion and Ethics. 

I.A.. . 


Indian Antiquary. 

J.A.O.S. 


Journal of the American Oriental Society. 

J.R.A.S. 


Journal of the Royal Asiatic Society. 

Milinda 


Questions of King Milinda. 

N.S. . 


Nyaya Sutras. 

O.S.T. . 


Original Sanskrit Texts. 

P. . . 


Pancastikayasamayasara. 

P.M. . 


Purva-Mimamsa Sutras. 

R.B. . 


Ramanuja’s Bhasya on the Vedanta Sutras. 

R.B.G. 


Ramanuja’s Bhasya on the Bhagavadgita. 

S.B. . 


Samkara’s Bhasya on the Vedanta Sutras. 

S.B.G. . 


Samkara’s Bhasya on the Bhagavadgita. 

S.B.E. . 


Sacred Books of the East. 

S.B.H. . 


Sacred Books of the Hindus. 

S.D.S. . 


Sarvadar&anasamgraha, 

S.K. . 


Samkhya Karika. 

Skt. . 


Sanskrit. 

S.S. . 


Six Systems of Indian Philosophy by Max Muller. 

S. Sutras 


Samkhya Sutras. 

S.S.S.S. 


Sarvasiddhantasarasamgraha. 

Up. 


Upanisads. 

U.T.S. . 


Umasvati’s Tattvartha Sutras. 

V.S. . 


Vedanta Sutras. 

W.B.T.. 


Warren : Buddhism in Translations. 

Y.S. . 


Yoga Sutras. 


>} 




INDIAN PHILOSOPHY 


CHAPTER I 

INTRODUCTION 

General characteristics of Indian philosophy — The natural situation of 
India — The dominance of the intellectual interest — The individuality 
of Indian philosophy — The influence of the West — The spiritual 
character of Indian thought — Its close relation to life and religion — 
The stress on the subjective — Psychological basis of metaphysics — 
Indian achievements in positive science — Speculative synthesis and 
scientific analysis — The brooding East — Monistic idealism — Its vari- 
eties, non-dualism, pure monism, modified monism and implicit 
monism — God is all — The intuitional nature of philosophy— Darfana 
— Aimkara's qualifications of a candidate for the study of philosophy 
— The constructive conservatism of Indian thought — The unity and 
continuity of Indian thought — Consideration of some charges levelled 
against Indian philosophy, such as pessimism, dogmatism, indifference 
to ethics and unpiogressive character — The value of the study of 
Indian philosophy — The justification of the title “ Indian Philosophy " 

— Historical method — The difficulty of a chronological treatment — 
The different periods of Indian thought — Yedic, epic, systematic and 
scholastic — " Indian " histories of Indian philosophy. 

I 

The Natural Situation of India 

For thinking minds to blossom, for arts and sciences to 
flourish, the first condition necessary is a settled society 
providing security and leisure. A rich culture is impossible 
with a community of nomads, where people struggle for life 
and die of privation. Fate called India to a spot where 
nature was free with her gifts and every prospect was pleasing. 
The Himalayas, with their immense range and elevation on 
one side and the sea on the others, helped to keep India 

free from invasion for a long time. ^Bounteous nature 

a 



22 INDIAN PHILOSOPHY 

yielded abundant food, and man was relieved of the toil and 
struggle for existence. The Indian never felt that the world 
was a field of battle where men struggled for power, wealth 
and domination. When we do not need to waste our energies 
on problems of life on earth, exploiting nature and controlling 
the forces of the world, w^ begin to think of the higher life, 
how to live more perfectly in the spirit. Perhaps an enervating 
climate inclined the Indian to rest and retirement. The 
huge forests with their wide leafy avenues afforded great 
opportunities for the devout soul to wander peacefully through 
them, dream strange dreams and burst forth into joyous 
songs. World-weary men go out on pilgrimages to these 
scenes of nature, acquire inward peace, listening to the rush 
of winds and torrents, the music of birds and leaves, and return 
whole of heart and fresh in spirit. It was in the asramas 
and tapovanas or forest hermitages that the thinking men of 
India meditated on the deeper problems of existence. The 
security of life, the wealth of natural resources, the freedom 
from worry, the detachment from the cares of existence, 
and the absence of a tyrannous practical interest, stimulated 
the higher life of India, with the result that we find from the 
beginnings of history an impatience of spirit, a love of wisdom 
and a passion for the saner pursuits of the mind. 

Helped by natural conditions, and provided with the 
intellectual scope to think out the implications of things, 
the Indian escaped the doom which Plato pronounced to be 
the worst of all, viz. the hatred of reason. " Let us above 
all things take heed,” says he in the Phcedo, “ that one mis- 
fortune does not befall us. Let us not become misologues 
as some people become misanthropes ; for no greater evil can 
befall men than to become haters of reason.” The pleasure 
of understanding is one of the purest available to man, and 
the passion of the Indian for it burns in the bright flame 
of the mind. 

In many other countries of the world, reflection on the 
nature of existence is a luxury of life. The serious moments 
are given to action, while the pursuit of philosophy comes up 
as a parenthesis. In ancient India philosophy was not an 
auxiliary to any other science or art, but always held a 
prominent position of independence. In the W r est, even 



INTRODUCTION 


23 


in the heyday of its youth, as in the times of Plato and 
Aristotle, it leaned for support on some other study, as politics 
or ethics. It was theology for the Middle Ages, natural 
science for Bacon a#d Newton, history, politics and sociology 
for the nineteenth-century thinkers. In India philosophy 
stood on its own legs, and all other studies looked to it for 
inspiration and* support. It is the master science guiding 
other sciences, without which they tend to become empty and 
foolish. The Mufidaka Upanisad speaks of Brahma-vidya 
or the science of the eternal as the basis of all sciences, 
sarva-vidya-pratistha. “ Philosophy,” says Kautilya, “ is 
the lamp of all the sciences, the means of performing all 
the works, and the support of all the duties.” 1 

Since philosophy is a human effort to comprehend the 
problem of the universe, it is subject to the influences of race 
and culture. Each nation has its own characteristic mentality, 
its particular intellectual bent. In all the fleeting centuries 
of history, in all the vicissitudes through which India has 
passed, a certain marked identity is visible. It has held 
fast to certain psychological traits which constitute its 
special heritage, and they will be the characteristic marks 
of the Indian people so long as they are privileged to have a 
separate existence. Individuality means independence of 
growth. It is not necessarily unlikeness. There cannot 
be complete unlikeness, since man the world over is the 
same, especially so far as the aspects of spirit are concerned. 
The variations are traceable to distinctions in age, history 
and temperament. They add to the wealth of the world 
culture, since there is no royal road to philosophic develop- 
ment any more than to any other result worth having. Before 
we notice the characteristic features of Indian thought, a 
few words may be said about the influence of the West on 
Indian thought. 

The question is frequently raised whether and to what 
extent Indian thought borrowed its ideas from foreign sources, 
such as Greece. Some of the views put forward by Indian 
thinkers resemble certain doctrines developed in ancient 
Greece, so much that anybody interested in discrediting this 


* See I.A., 1918, p. 102. See also B.G., x. 32. 



24 


INDIAN PHILOSOPHY 


or that thought system can easily do so. 1 The question of 
the affiliation of ideas is a useless, pursuit. To an unbiassed 
mind, the coincidences will be an evidence of historical 
parallelism. Similar experiences engender in men’s minds 
similar views. There is no material evidence to prove any 
direct borrowings, at any rate by India, Irom the West. 
Our account of Indian thought will show that it is an inde- 
pendent venture of the human mind. Philosophical problems 
are discussed without any influence from or relation to the 
West. In spite of occasional intercourse with the West, 
India had the freedom to develop its own ideal life, philosophy 
and religion. Whatever be the truth about the original 
home of the Aryans who came down to the Peninsula, they 
soon lost touch with their kindred in the West or the North, 
and developed on lines of their own. It is true that India 
was again and again invaded by armies pouring into it through 
the North-Western passes, but none of them, with the 
exception of Alexander’s, did anything to promote spiritual 
intercourse between the two worlds. Only latterly, when 
the gateway of the seas was opened, a more intimate inter- 
course has been fostered, the results of which we cannot 
forecast, since they are yet in the making. For all practical 
purposes, then, we may look upon Indian thought as a closed 
system or an autonomous growth. 


II 

General Characteristics of Indian Thought 

Philosophy in India is essentially spiritual. It is the 
intense spirituality of India, and not any great political 

1 Sir William Jones wrote : " Of the philosophical schools, it will be 
sufficient here to remark that the first Nyaya seems analogous to the 
Peripatetic ; the second, sometimes called Vai£c§ika, to the Ionic ; the 
two MI.i aiiislls, of which the second is often distinguished by the name of 
Vedanta, to the Platonic; the first Samkhya to the Italic; and the second 
of Patanjali to the Stoic philosophy ; so that Gautama corresponds with 
Aristotle, Kapada with Thales, Jaimini with Socrates, Vyasa with 
Plato, Kapila -with Pythagoras, and Patanjali with Zeno ” (Works, i, 
360-1. See also Colebrooke, Miscellaneous Essays, i. 4362.) While the 
opinion that Greek thought has been influenced ify" the Indian is frequently 
held, it is not so often urged that Indian thought owes much to Greek 
speculation. (See Garbe, Philosophy of Ancient India, chap, ii.) 



INTRODUCTION 


25 


structure or social organisation that it has developed, that 
has enabled it to resist the ravages of time and the accidents 
of history. External invasions and internal dissensions 
came very near crushing its civilisation many times in its 
history. The Greek and the Scythian, the Persian and the 
Mogul, the French and the English have by turn attempted 
to suppress it, and yet it has its head held high. India has 
not been finally subdued, and its old flame of spirit is still 
burning. Throughout its life it has been living with one 
purpose. It has fought for truth and against error. It 
may have blundered, but it did what it felt able and called 
upon to do. The history of Indian thought illustrates the 
endless quest of the mind, ever old, ever new. 

The spiritual motive dominates life in India. Indian 
philosophy has its interest in the haunts of men, and not in 
supra-lunar solitudes. It takes its origin in life, and enters 
back into life after passing through the schools. The great 
works of Indian philosophy do not have that ex cathedra 
character which is so prominent a feature of the latter 
criticisms and commentaries. The Gita and the Upanisads 
are not remote from popular belief. They are the great 
literature of the country, and at the same time vehicles of 
the great systems of thought. The Puranas contain the truth 
dressed up in myths and stories, to suit the weak understanding 
of the majority. The hard task of interesting the multitude 
in metaphysics is achieved in India. 

The founders of philosophy strive for a socio-spiritual 
reformation of the country. When the Indian civilisation 
is called a Brahmanical one, it only means that its main 
character and dominating motives are shaped by its philoso- 
phical thinkers and religious minds, though these are not 
all of Brahmin birth. The idea of Plato that philosophers 
must be the rulers and directors of society is practised in 
India. The ultimate truths are truths of spirit, and in the 
light of them actual life has to be refined. 

Religion in India is not dogmatic. It is a rational 
synthesis which goes on gathering into itself new conceptions 
as philosophy progresses. It is experimental and provisional 
in its nature, attempting to keep pace with the progress of 
thought. The common criticism that Indian thought. 



26 


INDIAN PHILOSOPHY 


by its emphasis on intellect, puts philosophy in the place of 
religion, brings out the rational character of religion in India. 
No religious movement has ever come into existence with- 
out developing as its support a philosophic content. Mr. 
Havell observes : " In India, religion is hardly a dogma, but 
a working hypothesis of human conduct, adapted to different 
stages of spiritual development and different conditions of 
life.” 1 Whenever it tended to crystallise itself in a fixed 
creed, there were set up spiritual revivals and philosophic 
reactions which threw beliefs into the crucible of criticism, 
vindicated the true and combated the false. Again and again, 
we shall observe, how when traditionally accepted beliefs 
become inadequate, nay false, on account of changed times, 
and the age grows out of patience with them, the insight of 
a new teacher, a Buddha or a Mahavlra, a Vyasa or a 
Samkara supervenes, stirring the depths of spiritual life. 
These are doubtless great moments in the history of Indian 
thought, times of inward testing and vision, when at the 
summons of the spirit’s breath, blowing where it listeth and 
coming whence no one knows, the soul of man makes a fresh 
start and goes forth on a new venture. It is the intimate 
relation between the truth of philosophy and the daily life of 
people that makes religion always alive and real. 

The problems of religion stimulate the philosophic spirit. 
The Indian mind has been traditionally exercised over the 
questions of the nature of Godhead, the end of life and the 
relation of the individual to the universal soul. Though 
philosophy in India has not as a rule completely freed itself 
from the fascinations of religious speculation, yet the philoso- 
phical discussions have not been hampered by religious 
forms. The two were not confused. On account of the 
close connection between theory and practice, doctrine and 
life, a philosophy which could not stand the test of life, not 
in the pragmatistic but the larger sense of the term, had no 
chance of survival. To those who realise the true kinship 
between life and theory, philosophy becomes a way of 
life, an approach to spiritual realisation. There has been 
no teaching, not even the Sariikhya, which remained a mere 

* Aryan Rule in India, p. 170. See the article on The Heart of 
Hinduism : Hibberi Journal, October, 1922. 



26 


INDIAN PHILOSOPHY 


by its emphasis on intellect, puts philosophy in the place of 
religion, brings out the rational character of religion in India. 
No religious movement has ever come into existence with- 
out developing as its support a philosophic content. Mr. 
Havell observes : “ In India, religion is hardly a dogma, but 
a working hypothesis of human conduct, adapted to different 
stages of spiritual development and different conditions of 
life.” 1 Whenever it tended to crystallise itself in a fixed 
creed, there were set up spiritual revivals and philosophic 
reactions which threw beliefs into the crucible of criticism, 
vindicated the true and combated the false. Again and again, 
we shall observe, how when traditionally accepted beliefs 
become inadequate, nay false, on account of changed times, 
and the age grows out of patience with them, the insight of 
a new teacher, a Buddha or a Mahavlra, a Vyasa or a 
Samkara supervenes, stirring the depths of spiritual life. 
These are doubtless great moments in the history of Indian 
thought, times of inward testing and vision, when at the 
summons of the spirit’s breath, blowing where it listeth and 
coming whence no one knows, the soul of man makes a fresh 
start and goes forth on a new venture. It is the intimate 
relation between the truth of philosophy and the daily life of 
people that makes religion always alive and real. 

The problems of religion stimulate the philosophic spirit. 
The Indian mind has been traditionally exercised over the 
questions of the nature of Godhead, the end of life and the 
relation of the individual to the universal soul. Though 
philosophy in India has not as a rule completely freed itself 
from the fascinations of religious speculation, yet the philoso- 
phical discussions have not been hampered by religious 
forms. The two were not confused. On account of the 
close connection between theory and practice, doctrine and 
life, a philosophy which could not stand the test of life, not 
in the pragmatistic but the larger sense of the term, had no 
chance of survival. To those who realise the true kinship 
between life and theory, philosophy becomes a way of 
life, an approach to spiritual realisation. There has been 
no teaching, not even the Samkhya, which remained a mere 

' Aryan Rule in India, p. 170. See the article on The Heart 0} 
Hinduism .* Hibbcrt Journal , October, 1922. 



INTRODUCTION 


27 


word of mouth or dogma of schools. Every doctrine is turned 
into a passionate conviction, stirring the heart of man and 
quickening his breath. 

It is untrue to say that philosophy in India never became 
self-conscious or critical. Even in its early stages rational 
reflection tended to correct religious belief. Witness the 
advance of religion implied in the progress from the hymns of 
the Veda to the Upanisads. When we come to Buddhism, the 
philosophic spirit has already become that confident attitude 
of mind which in intellectual matters bends to no outside 
authority and recognises no limit to its enterprise, unless it 
be as the result of logic, which probes all things, tests all 
things, and follows fearlessly wherever the argument leads. 
When we reach the several darsanas or systems of thought, 
we have mighty and persistent efforts at systematic thinking. 
How completely free from traditional religion and bias the 
systems are will be obvious from the fact that the Samkhya 
is silent about the existence of God, though certain about its 
theoretical indemonstrability. Vaisesika and Yoga, while 
they admit a supreme being, do not consider him to be the 
creator of the universe, and Jaimini refers to God only to 
deny his providence and moral government of the world. 
The early Buddhist systems are known to be indifferent to 
God, and we have also the materialist Carvakas, who deny 
God, ridicule the priests, revile the Vedas and seek salvation 
in pleasure. 

The supremacy of religion and of social tradition in life 
does not hamper the free pursuit of philosophy. It is a 
strange paradox, and yet nothing more than the obvious truth 
that while the social life of an individual is bound by the 
rigours of caste, he is free to roam in the matter of opinion. 
Reason freely questions and criticises the creeds in which men 
are born. That is why the heretic, the sceptic, the un- 
believer, the rationalist and the freethinker, the materialist 
and the hedonist all flourish in the soil of India. The 
Mahabharata says : “ There is no muni w T ho has not an opinion 
of his own.” ' 

All this is evidence of the strong intellectuality of the 
Indian mind which seeks to know the inner truth and the 
law of all sides of human activity. This intellectual impulse 

VOL. [ 2 



28 


INDIAN PHILOSOPHY 


is not confined to philosophy and theology, but extends over 
logic and grammar, rhetoric and language, medicine and 
astronomy, in fact all arts and sciences, from architecture 
to zoology. Everything useful to life or interesting to mind 
becomes an object of inquiry and criticism. It will give 
an idea of the all comprehensive character of intellectual 
life, to know that even such minutiae as the breeding of 
horses and the training of elephants had their own sastras 
and literature. 

The philosophic attempt to determine the nature of 
reality may start either with the thinking self or the objects 
of thought. In India the interest of philosophy is in the self of 
man. Where the vision is turned outward, the rush of fleeting 
events engages the mind. In India “ Atmanam viddhi,” 
know the self, sums up the law and the prophets. Within 
man is the spirit that is the centre of everything. , Psychology 
and ethics are the basal sciences. \The life of mind is depicted 
in all its mobile variety and subtle play of light and shade 
Indian psychology realised the value of concentration and 
looked upon it as the means for the perception of the truth! 
It believed that there were no ranges of life or mind which 
could not be reached by a methodical training of will and 
knowledge. It recognised the close connexion of mind and 
body. The psychic experiences, such as telepathy and 
clairvoyance, were considered to be neither abnormal nor 
miraculous. They are not the products of diseased minds 
or inspiration from the gods, but powers which the human 
mind can exhibit under carefully ascertained conditions. 
The mind of man has the three aspects of the subconscious, 
the conscious and the superconscious, and the “ abnormal ” 
psychic phenomena, called by the different names of ecstasy, 
genius, inspiration, madness, are the workings of the super- 
conscious mind. The Yoga system of philosophy deals 
specially with these experiences, though the other systems 
refer to them and utilise them for their purposes. 

The metaphysical schemes are based on the data of the 
psychological science. The criticism that Western meta- 
physics is one-sided, since its attention is confined to the 
waking state alone, is not without its force. There are other 
states of consciousness as much entitled to consideration as 



INTRODUCTION 


29 


the waking. Indian thought takes into account the modes 
of waking, dreaming and dreamless sleep. If we look upon 
the waking consciousness as the whole, then we get realistic, 
dualistic and pluralistic conceptions of metaphysics. Dream 
consciousness when exclusively studied leads us to subjectivist 
doctrines. The state of dreamless sleep inclines us to 
abstract and mystical theories. The whole truth must take 
all the modes of consciousness into account. 

The dominance of interest in the subjective does not mean 
that in objective sciences India had nothing to say. If we 
refer to the actual achievements of India in the realm of 
positive science, we shall see that the opposite is the case. 
Ancient Indians laid the foundations of mathematical and 
mechanical knowledge. They measured the land, divided 
the year, mapped out the heavens, traced the course of the 
sun and the planets through the zodiacal belt, analysed the 
constitution of matter, and studied the nature of birds and 
beasts, plants and seeds . 1 “ Whatever conclusions we may 
arrive at as to the original source of the first astronomical 
ideas current in the world, it is probable that to the Hindus 
is due the invention of algebra and its application to 
astronomy and geometry. From them also the Arabs received 
not only their first conceptions of algebraic analysis, but also 
those invaluable numerical symbols and decimal notation now 
current everywhere in Europe, which have rendered untold 
service to the progress of arithmetical science. ” 1 “ The 

motions of the moon and the sun were carefully observed 
by the Hindus, and with such success that their determination 
of the moon’s synodical revolution is a much more correct 
one than the Greeks ever achieved. They had a division of 
the ecliptic into twenty-seven and twenty-eight parts, 
suggested evidently by the moon’s period in days and 

1 We may quote a passage which is certainly not less than 2,000 years 
before the birth of Copernicus, from the Aitareya Brahmaga : “ The sun 
never sets nor rises. When people think to themselves the sun is setting, 
he only changes about after reaching the end of the day, and makes night 
below and day to what is on the other side. Then when people think he 
rises in the morning, he only shifts himself about after reaching the end 
of the night, and makes day below and night to what is on the other side. 
In fact he never docs set at all." Haug’s Edition, iii. 44 ; Chan. Up., iii. 
11. 1-3. Even if this be folklore, it is interesting. 

• Monier Williams: Indian Wisdom, p. 184. 



30 INDIAN PHILOSOPHY 

seemingly their own. They were particularly conversant 
with the most splendid of the primary planets ; the period 
of Jupiter being introduced by them, in conjunction with 
those of the sun and the moon into the regulation of their 
calendar in the form of the cycle of sixty years, common 
to them and the Chaldeans.” 1 It is now admitted that the 
Hindus at a very early time conceived and developed the 
two sciences of logic and grammar. 1 Wilson writes : “ In 
medicine, as in astronomy and metaphysics, the Hindus once 
kept pace with the most enlightened nations of the world ; 
and they attained as thorough a proficiency in medicine and 
surgery as any people whose acquisitions are recorded, and 
as indeed was practicable, before anatomy was made known 
to us by the discoveries of modern inquirers.” 3 It is true 
that they did not invent any great mechanical appliances. 
For this a kind Heaven, which gave them the great water- 
courses and abundant supplies of food, is responsible. Let 
us also remember that these mechanical inventions belong, 
after all, to the sixteenth century and after, by which time 
India had lost her independence and become parasitic. 
The day she lost her freedom and began to flirt with other 
nations, a curse fell on her and she became petrified. Till 
then she could hold her own even in arts, crafts and industries, 
not to speak of mathematics, astronomy, chemistry, medicine, 
surgery, and those branches of physical knowledge practised 
in ancient times. She knew how to chisel stone, draw pictures, 
burnish gold and weave rich fabrics. She developed all 
arts, fine and industrial, which furnish the conditions of 
civilised existence. Her ships crossed the oceans and her 
wealth brimmed over to Judaea, Egypt and Rome. Her 
conceptions of man and society, morals and religion were 
remarkable for the time. We cannot reasonably say that 
the Indian people revelled in poetry and mythology, and 
spurned science and philosophy, though it is true that they 
were more intent on seeking the unity of things than 
emphasising their sharpness and separation. 

The speculative mind is more synthetic, while the scientific 

* Colebrooke’s translation of Bhaskara’s Work oj Algebra, p. xxii. 

* See Max Muller's Sanskrit Literature. 

9 Works, vol. iii. p. 269. 



INTRODUCTION 


81 


one is more analytic, if such a distinction be permitted. 
The former tends to create cosmic philosophies which 
embrace in one comprehensive vision the origin of all 
things, the history of ages and the dissolution and decay 
of the world. The latter is inclined to linger over the dull 
particulars of the world and miss the sense of oneness and 
wholeness. Indian thought attempts vast, impersonal views 
of existence, and makes it easy for the critic to bring the 
charge of being more idealistic and contemplative, producing 
dreamy visionaries and strangers in the world, while Western 
thought is more particularist and pragmatistic. The latter 
depends on what we call the senses, the former presses the 
soul sense into the service of speculation. Once again it 
is the natural conditions of India that account for the 
contemplative turn of the Indian who had the leisure to enjoy 
the beautiful things of the world and express his wealth of 
soul in song and story, music and dance, rites and religions, 
undisturbed by the passions of the outer world. “ The 
brooding East,” frequently employed as a term of ridicule, 
is not altogether without its truth. 

It is the synthetic vision of India that has made philosophy 
comprehend several sciences which have become differentiated 
in modern times. In the West during the last hundred years 
or so several branches of knowledge till then included under 
philosophy, economics, politics, morals, psychology, education 
have been one by one sheared away from it. Philosophy 
in the time of Plato meant all those sciences which are bound 
up with human nature and form the core of man's speculative 
interests. In the same way in ancient Indian scriptures we 
possess the full content of the philosophic sphere. Latterly 
in the West philosophy became synonymous with metaphysics, 
or the abstruse discussions of knowledge, being and value, 
and the complaint is heard that metaphysics has become 
absolutely theoretical, being cut off from the imaginative 
and the practical sides of human nature. 

If we put the subjective interest of the Indian mind 
along with its tendency to arrive at a synthetic vision, we 
shall see how monistic idealism becomes the truth of things- 
To it the w r hole growth of Vedic thought points ; on it are 
based the Buddhistic and the Brahmanical religions ; it is 



32 


INDIAN PHILOSOPHY 


the highest truth revealed to India. Even systems which 
announce themselves as aualistic or pluralistic seem to be 
permeated by a strong monistic character. If we can abstract 
from the variety of opinion and observe the general spirit 
of Indian thought, we shall find that it has a disposition 
to interpret life and nature in the way of monistic idealism, 
though this tendency is so plastic, living and manifold that 
it takes many forms and expresses itself in even mutually 
hostile teachings. We may briefly indicate the main forms 
which monistic idealism has assumed in Indian thought, 
leaving aside detailed developments and critical estimates. 
This will enable us to grasp the nature and function of 
philosophy as understood in India. For our purposes 
monistic idealism is of four types : (i) Non-dualism or 

Advaitism ; (2) Pure monism ; (3) Modified monism ; and 
(4) Implicit monism. 

Philosophy proceeds on the facts of experience. Logical 
reflection is necessary to ascertain whether the facts observed 
by one individual are accepted by all, or are only subjective 
in their character. Theories are accepted if they account 
for facts satisfactorily. We have already said that the facts 
of mind or consciousness were studied by the Indian thinkers 
with as much care and attention as the facts of the outer 
world are studied by our modern scientists. The philosophical 
conclusions of Advaitic monism are based on the data of 
psychological observation. 

The activities of the self are assigned to the three states 
of waking, dreaming and dreamless sleep. In dream states 
an actual concrete world is presented to us. We do not call 
that world real, since on waking we find that the dream world 
does not fit in with the waking world ; yet relatively to the 
dream state the dream world is real. It is discrepancy 
from our conventional standards of waking life, and not any 
absolute knowledge of truth as subsisting by itself, that tells 
us that dream states are less real than the waking ones. 
Even waking reality is a relative one. It has no permanent 
existence, being only a correlate of the waking state. It 
disappears in dream and sleep. The waking consciousness 
and the world disclosed to it are related to each other, depend 
on each other as the dream consciousness and the dream- 



INTRODUCTION 


83 


world are. They are not absolutely real, for in the words 
of Samkara, while the “ dream-world is daily sublated, the 
waking world is sublatrd under exceptional circumstances.” 
In dreamless sleep we have a cessation of the empirical 
consciousness. Some Indian thinkers are of opinion that we 
have in this condition an objectless consciousness. At 
any rate this is clear, that dreamless sleep is not a complete 
non-being or negation for such a hypothesis conflicts with the 
later recollection of the happy repose of sleep. We cannot 
help conceding that the self continues to exist, though it is 
bereft of all experience. There is no object felt and there 
can be none so long as the sleep is sound. The pure self 
seems to be unaffected by the flotsam and jetsam of ideas 
which rise and vanish with particular moods. " What 
varies not, nor changes in the midst of things that vary and 
change is different from them.” 1 The self which persists 
unchanged and is one throughout all the changes is different 
from them all. The conditions change, not the self. “ In 
all the endless months, years and small and great cycles, 
past and to come, this self-luminous consciousness alone 
neither rises nor ever sets.” * An unconditioned reality 
where time and space along with all their objects vanish is 
felt to be real. It is the self which is the unaffected spectator 
of the whole drama of ideas related to the changing moods 
of waking, dreaming and sleeping. We are convinced that 
there is something in us beyond joy and misery, virtue and 
vice, good and bad. The self " never dies, is never bom — 
unborn, eternal, everlasting, this ancient one can never be 
destroyed with the destruction of the body. If the slayer 
thinks he can slay, or if the slain thinks he is slain, they 
both do not know the truth, for the self neither slays nor is 
slain.” 3 

In addition to the ever-identical self, we have also the 
empirical variety of objects. The former is permanent, 
immutable, the latter impermanent and ever changing. 
The former is absolute, being independent of all objects, 
the latter changes with the moods. 

1 “ Yesu v ya vartama ne§ u yad anuvartate tat tebhyo bhinnam *' 

(BhamatJ). 

• PaficadaSl, i. 7. I Katha Up, ii. 18-19 ; B.G., ii. 19-20. 



34 INDIAN PHILOSOPHY 

How are we to account for the world ? The empirical 
variety is there bound in space, time and cause. If the self 
is the one, the universal, the immutable, we find in the world 
a mass of particulars with opposed characters. We can only 
call it the not-self, the object of a subject. In no case is it 
real. The principal categories of the world of experience, 
time, space and cause are self-contradictory. They are 
relative terms depending on their constituents. They have 
no real existence. Yet they are not non-existent. The 
world is there, and we work in it and through it. We do not 
and cannot know the why of this world. It is this fact 
of its inexplicable existence that is signified by the word 
mdya. To ask what is the relation between the absolute self 
and the empirical flux, to ask why and how it happens, 
that there are two, is to assume that everything has a why 
and a how. To say that the infinite becomes the finite or 
manifests itself as finite is on this view utter nonsense. 
The limited cannot express or manifest the unlimited. The 
moment the unlimited manifests itself in the limited, it 
itself becomes limited. To say that the absolute degenerates 
or lapses into the empirical is to contradict its absoluteness. 
No lapse can come to a perfect being. No darkness can dwell 
in perfect light. We cannot admit that the supreme, which 
is changeless, becomes limited by changing. To change 
is to desire or to feel a want, and it shows lack of perfection. 
The absolute can never become an object of knowledge, for 
what is known is finite and relative. Our limited mind cannot 
go beyond the bounds of time, space and cause, nor can we 
explain these, since every attempt to explain them assumes 
them. Through thought, which is itself a part of the relative 
world, we cannot know the absolute self. Our relative 
experience is a waking dream. Science and logic are parts 
of it and products of it too. This failure of metaphysics 
is neither to be wept over nor to be laughed over, neither to 
be praised nor blamed, but understood. With a touching 
humility born of intellectual strength, a Plato, or a Nagarjuna, 
a Kant or a £amkara, declares that our thought deals with 
the relative, and has nothing to do with the absolute. 

Though the absolute being is not known in the logical 
way, it is yet realised by all who strain to know the truth, as 



INTRODUCTION 


85 


the reality in which we live, move and have our being. Only 
through it can anything else be known. It is the eternal 
witness of all knowledge. The non-dualist contends that 
his theory is based on the logic of facts. The self is the inmost 
and deepest reality, felt by all, since it is the self of all things 
known and unknown too, and there is no knower to know 
it except itself. It is the true and the eternal, and there is 
nought beside it. As for the empirical ramifications which 
also exist, the non-dualist says, well, they are there, and there 
is an end of it. We do not know and cannot know why. It 
is all a contradiction, and yet is actual. Such is the philoso- 
phical position of Advaita or non-dualism taken up by Gauda- 
pada and Ssaiiikara. 

There are Advaitins who are dissatisfied with this view, 
and feel that it is no good covering up our confusion by the 
use of the word maya. They attempt to give a more positive 
account of the relation between the perfect being absolutely 
devoid of any negativity, the immutable real, felt in the 
depths of experience and the world of change and becoming. 
To preserve the perfection of the one reality we are obliged 
to say that the world of becoming is not due to an addition 
of any element from outside, since there is nothing outside. 
It can only be by a diminution. Something negative like 
Plato’s non-being or Aristotle’s matter is assumed to account 
for change. Through the exercise of this negative principle, 
the immutable seems to be spread out in the moving many. 
Rays stream out of the sun which nevertheless did not contain 
them. Maya is the name of the negative principle which 
lets loose the universal becoming, thereby creating endless 
agitation and perpetual disquiet. The flux of the universe 
is brought about by the apparent degradation of the 
immutable. The real represents all that is positive in be- 
coming. The things of the world ever struggle to recover 
their reality, to fill up what is lacking in them, to shake off 
their individuality and separateness, but are prevented from 
doing so by their inner void, the negative maya constituted 
by the interval between what they are and what they ought 
to be. If we get rid of maya, suppress the tendency to duality, 
abolish the interval, fill up the deficit, and allow the 
disturbance to relax, space, time and change reach back into 
von. i 2 * 



36 INDIAN PHILOSOPHY 

pure being. As long as the original insufficiency of maya 
prevails, things are condemned to be existent in space— 
time — cause world. Maya is not a human construction. 
It is prior to our intellect and independent of it. It is verily 
the generator of things and intellects, the immense potentiality 
of the whole world. It is sometimes called the prakrti. 
The alternations of generation and decay, the ever-repeated 
cosmic evolutions, all represent this fundamental deficit 
in which the world consists. The world of becoming is the 
interruption of being. Maya is the reflection of reality. 
The world-process is not so much a translation of immutable 
being as its inversion. Yet the world of maya cannot exist 
apart from pure being. There can be no movement, if there 
were not immutability, since movement is only a degradation 
of the immutable. The truth of the universal mobility is 
the immobile being. 

As becoming is a lapse from being, so is avidya or ignorance 
a fall from vidya or knowledge. To know the truth, to 
apprehend reality, we have to get rid of avidya and its 
intellectual moulds, which all crack the moment we try to 
force reality into them. This is no excuse for indolence 
of thought. Philosophy as logic on this view persuades 
us to give up the employment of the intellectual concepts 
which are relative to our practical needs and the world of 
becoming. Philosophy tells us that, so long as we are bound 
by intellect and are lost in the world of many, we shall seek 
in vain to get back to the simplicity of the one. If we ask 
the reason why there is avidya, or maya, bringing about a fall 
from vidya or from being, the question cannot be answered. 
Philosophy as logic has here the negative function of exposing 
the inadequacy of all intellectual categories, pointing out how 
the objects of the world are relative to the mind that thinks 
them and possess no independent existence. It cannot 
tell us anything definite about either the immutable said to 
exist apart from what is happening in the world, or about 
maya, credited with the production of the world. It cannot 
help us directly to the attainment of reality. It, on the other 
hand, tells us that to measure reality we have to distort 
it. It may perhaps serve the interests of truth when once 
it is independently ascertained. We can think it out, 



INTRODUCTION 


37 


defend it logically and help its propagation. The supporters 
of pure monism recognise a higher power than abstract 
intellect which enables us to feel the push of reality. We 
have to sink ourselves in the universal consciousness and make 
ourselves co-extensive with all that is. We do not then so 
much think reality as live it, do not so much know it as become 
it. Such an extreme monism, with its distinctions of logic 
and intuition, reality and the world of existence, we meet 
with in some Upanisads, Nagurjuna and Samkara in his 
ultra-philosophical moods, 5ri Harsa and the Advaita 
Vedantins, and echoes of it are heard in Parmenides and 
Plato, Spinoza and Plotinus, Bradley and Bergson, not to 
speak of the mystics, in the West. 1 

Whatever the being, pure and simple, may be to intuition, 
to intellect it is nothing more or less than an absolute 
abstraction. It is supposed to continue when every fact 
and form of existence is abolished. It is the residue left 
behind when abstraction is made from the whole world. It 
is a difficult exercise set to the thought of man to think away 
the sea and the earth, the sun and the stars, space and time, 
man and God. When an effort is made to abolish the whole 
universe, sublate all existence, nothing seems to remain for 
thought. Thought, finite and relational, finds to its utter 
despair that there is just nothing at all when everything 
existent is abolished. To the conceptual mind the central 
proposition of intuition, “ Being only is,” means that there 
is just nothing at all. Thought, as Hegel said, can only work 
with determinate realities, concrete things. To it all 
affirmation implies negation, and vice versa. Every concrete 
is a becoming, combining being and non-being, positive 
and negative. So those who are not satisfied with the intuited 
being, and wish to have a synthesis capable of being attained 
by thought which has a natural instinct for the concrete, 
are attracted to a system of objective idealism. The concrete 
idealists try to put together the two concepts of pure being 

1 In the Samkhya philosophy we have practically the same account 
of the world of experience, which does not in the least stain the purity of 
the witness self. Only a pluralistic prejudice which has no logical basis 
asserts itself, and we have a plurality of souls. When the pluralism collapses, 
as it does at the first touch of logic, the SSmkhya theory becomes identical 
with the pure monism here sketched. 



38 


INDIAN PHILOSOPHY 


and apparent becoming in the single synthesis of God. Even 
extreme monists recognise that becoming depends on being, 
though not vice versa. We get now a sort of refracted 
absolute, a God who has in Him the possibility of the world, 
combines in His nature the essence of all being, as well as of 
becoming, unity as well as plurality, unlimitedness and 
limitation. The pure being now becomes the subject, 
transforming itself into object and taking back the object 
into itself. Position, opposition, and composition, to use 
Hegelian expressions, go on in an eternal circular process. 
Hegel rightly perceives that the conditions of a concrete 
world are a subject and an object. These two opposites 
are combined in every concrete. The great God Himself 
has in Him the two antagonistic characters where the one is 
not only through the other, but is actually the other. When 
such a dynamic God eternally bound in the rotating wheel 
is asserted, all the degrees of existence, from the divine 
perfection up to vile dust, are automatically realised. The 
affirmation of God is the simultaneous affirmation of all 
degrees of reality between it and nothing. We have now the 
universe of thought constructed by thought, answering 
to thought and sustained by thought, in which subject and 
object are absorbed as moments. The relations of space, 
time and cause are not subjective forms, but universal 
principles of thought. If on the view of pure monism we 
cannot understand the exact relation between identity and 
difference, we are here on better ground. The world is 
identity gone into difference. Neither is isolated from the 
other. God is the inner ground, the basis of identity ; the 
world is the outer manifestation, the externalisation of self- 
consciousness. 

Such a God, according to the theory of pure monism, is 
just the lapse from the absolute, with the least conceivable 
interval separating him from pure being or the absolute. 
It is the product of avidya which is separated from vidya by 
the least conceivable extent. In other words, this concrete 
God is the highest product of our highest intelligence. The 
pity is, that it is a product after all, and our intelligence, 
however near it approximates to vidya, is not yet vidya. 
This God has in him the maximum of being and the minimum 



INTRODUCTION 


39 


of defect — still a defect. The first touch of maya, the 
slightest diminution of absolute being, is enough to throw 
it into space and time, though this space and this time will 
be as near as possible to the absolute unextendedness and 
eternity. The absolute one is converted into the Creator 
God existent in some space, moving all things from within 
without stirring from His place. God is the absolute 
objectivised as something somewhere, a spirit that pushes 
itself into everything. He is being-non-being, Brahman- 
maya, subject-object, eternal force, the motionless mover 
of Aristotle, the absolute spirit of Hegel, the (absolute- 
relative) viSistadvaita of Ramanuja, the efficient as well as 
the final cause of the universe. The world is beginningless 
and endless, since the energising of God could not have begun 
and could never come to an end. It is its essential nature 
to be ever at unrest. 

There is no doubt that this is the highest conception 
which thought can reach. If we follow to the end the natural 
movement of our intellect which tries to unify the things of 
the world and synthesise opposites, a principle of explanation 
which is neither pure being nor pure non-being, but something 
which combines both, is what we get. This concept is 
constructed by a compression of all things into the whole. 
Philosophy on this view is constructive in character, and is 
therefore positive in its nature and synthetic in its function. 
Even here logical understanding playing with abstractions 
shuts us from the concrete in which alone the abstractions 
live, move and have their being. Thought as reason gets 
over the difficulties of logical understanding. Starting from 
the world of experience, we go up to the ultimate principle 
of God, and from the conception of the whole so gained 
we descend into details and review the parts. All logical 
dogmatisms wlrich have confidence in the power of thought 
end with this conception of the world. The difficulty arises 
if we doubt the absoluteness of thought. May not our know- 
ledge be relative to the requirements of the mind which 
unifies and divides ? Perhaps for a mind differently shaped, 
knowledge may be different from what it is. Our present 
knowledge makes us think that all knowledge will be of this 
type, but when there are critics who dispute such an assertion. 



40 INDIAN PHILOSOPHY 

it is difficult to defend the position. Admitting that the 
conceptual plan of reality revealed to thought is true, still, 
it is sometimes urged, thought is not identical with reality. 
By compressing all concepts into one, we do not go beyond 
concepts. A relation is only a part of the mind that relates. 
Even an infinitely superior mind is yet a mind and of the 
same mould as man’s. The theory of modified monism is 
adopted by some Upanisads, and the Bhagavadgita, some 
followers of Buddhism and Ramanuja, if not Badarayana. 
In the West Aristotle and Hegel stand out as witnesses 
to it. 

According to the first view perfect being is real ; unreal 
becoming is actual, though, we do not know why. According 
to the second, the world becoming is a precipitation (apparent) 
of pure being into space and time by the force of diminution 
or xnaya. According to the third, the highest product we 
have is a synthesis of pure being and not-being in God. 
We are immediately under a logical necessity to affirm all 
intermediate degrees of reality. If pure being is dismissed 
as a concept useless so far as the world of experience is 
concerned and we also disregard as illogical the idea of a 
Creator God, then what exists is nothing more than a mere 
flux of becoming, ever aspiring to be something else than 
what it is. The main principle of Buddhism results. In 
the world of existence, on the hypothesis of modified monism, 
the specific characters of the degrees of intermediate reality 
are to be measured by the distance separating them from the 
integral reality. The common characters of all of them are 
existence in space and time. Closer attention reveals to 
us more and more special attributes. Admit the distinction 
between thinking reals and unthinking objects, and we have 
the dualistic philosophy of Madhva. Even this is funda- 
mentally a monism so long as the reals are dependent (para- 
tantra) on God, who alone is independent (svatantra). 
Emphasise the independence of the thinking beings, and we 
have pluralism according to Sarhkhya, if only we do not worry 
about the existence of God which cannot be demonstrated. 
Add to it the plurality of the objects of the world, we have 
pluralistic realism, where even God becomes one real, however 
great or powerful, among others. In the discussions about 



INTRODUCTION 


41 


the intermediate degrees of reality the unit of individuality 
seems to depend upon the fancy of the philosopher. And 
whether a system turns out atheistic or theistic is determined 
by the attention paid to the absolute under the segis of which 
the drama of the universe is enacted. It sometimes shines 
out brilliantly with its light focussed in a God and at other 
times fades out. These are the different ways in which the 
mind of man reacts to the problems of the world according 
to its own peculiar constitution. 

There is a cordial harmony between God and man in 
Indian thought, while the opposition between the two is 
more marked in the West. The mythologies of the peoples 
also indicate it. The myth of Prometheus, the representative 
man, who tries to help mankind by defending them against 
Zeus who desires to destroy the human race and supplant 
them with a new and better species, the story of the labours 
of Hercules who tries to redeem the world, the conception 
of Christ as the Son of Man, indicate that man is the centre 
of attention in the West. It is true that Christ is also called 
the Son of God, the eldest begotten who is to be sacrificed 
before a just God’s anger can be appeased. Our point here 
is that the main tendency of Western culture is an opposition 
between man and God, where man resists the might of God, 
steals fire from him in the interests of humanity. In India 
man is a product of God. The whole world is due to the 
sacrifice of God. The Purusa Sukta speaks of such an eternal 
sacrifice which sustains man and the world . 1 In it the whole 
world is pictured as one single being of incomparable vastness 
and immensity, animated by one spirit, including within its 
substance all forms of life. 

The dominant character of the Indian mind which has 
coloured all its culture and moulded all its thoughts is the 
spiritual tendency. Spiritual experience is the foundation 
of India’s rich cultural history. It is mysticism, not in the 
sense of involving the exercise of any mysterious power, 
but only as insisting on a discipline of human nature, leading 
to a realisation of the spiritual. While the sacred scriptures 
of the Hebrews and the Christians are more religious and 
ethical, those of the Hindus are more spiritual and 

1 K.V., x. 90 ; see also RV., x. Si, 3 ; Sv. lasvatara Up., iii. 3 ; B.G., xi. 



42 INDIAN PHILOSOPHY 

contemplative. The one fact of life in India is the Eternal 
Being of God. 

It is the ultimate presupposition of all philosophy that 
nothing real can be self-contradictory. In the history of 
thought it takes some time to realise the importance of this 
presupposition, and make a conscious application of it. In 
the Rgveda there is an unconscious acceptance of the validity 
of ordinary knowledge. When we reach the stage of the 
Upanisads, dialectical problems emerge and the difficulties 
of knowledge are felt. In them we find an attempt made to 
mark the limits of knowledge and provide room for intuition, 
but all in a semi-philosophical way. When faith in the 
power of reason was shaken, scepticism supervened, and 
materialists and nihilists came upon the scene. Admitting 
the Upanisad position that the unseen reality cannot be 
comprehended by the logical intellect, Buddhism enforced 
the unsubstantiality of the world. To it, contradiction is 
of the nature of things, and the world of experience is nothing 
more than a tension of opposites. We cannot know if there 
is anything more than the actual, and this cannot be real 
since it is self-contradictory. Such a conclusion was the end 
of the Buddhistic development. We have in the theory of 
Nagarjuna a philosophically sustained statement of the 
central position of the Upanisads. There is a real, though 
we cannot know it ; and what we know is not real, for every 
interpretation of the world as an intelligible system breaks 
down. All this prepared the way for a self-conscious 
criticism of reason. Thought itself is self -contradictory 
or inadequate. Differences arise when the question is put, 
why exactly it is incapable of grasping reality. Is it because 
it deals with parts and not the whole, or is it because of its 
structural incapacity or innate self-contradictoriness ? As 
we have seen, there are those who hold to the rationality of 
the real with the reservation that reality is not mere reason. 
So thought is incapable of giving us the whole of reality. 
The “ that ” exceeds the “ what ” in Bradley’s words. 
Thought gives us knowledge of reality, but it is only know- 
ledge, and not reality. There are others who feel that the 
real is self-consistent, and whatever is thought is self-contra- 
dictory. Thought works with the opposition of subject 



INTRODUCTION 


43 


and object, and the absolute real is something In which these 
antitheses are annulled. The most concrete thought, in 
so far as it tries to combine a many in one, is still abstract, 
because it is self-contradictory, and if we want to grasp the 
real, we have to give up thought. On the first hypothesis, 
what thought reveals is not opposed to reality, but is 
revelatory of a part of it. Partial views are contradictory 
only because they are partial. They are true so far as they 
go, but they are not the whole truth. The second hypothesis 
tells us that reality can be apprehended by a form of feeling 
or intuition . 1 The first view also insists on a supplementing 
of thought by feeling, if reality is to be attained in its fullness. 
We seem to require another element in addition to thought, 
and this is suggested by the term “ darsana,” which is used 
to describe a system of philosophy, doctrine or sastra. 

The term “ darSana ” comes from the word drs, to see. 
This seeing may be either perceptual observation or conceptual 
knowledge or intuitional experience. It may be inspection 
of facts, logical inquiry or insight of soul. Generally, 
" darsanas ” mean critical expositions, logical surveys, or 
systems. We do not find the word used in .this reference 
in the early stages of philosophical thought, when philosophy 
was more intuitional. It shows that “ darsana ” is not an 
intuition, however much it may be allied to it. Perhaps 
the word is advisedly used, to indicate a thought system 
acquired by intuitive experience and sustained by logical 
argument. In the systems of extreme monism philosophy 
prepares the way for intuitional experience by giving us an 
idea of the impotence of thought. In the systems of moderate 
monism, where the real is a concrete whole, philosophy succeeds 
at best in giving an ideal reconstruction of reality. But the 
real transcends, surrounds and overflows our miserable 
categories. In extreme monism it is intuitional experience 
that reveals to us the fullness of reality ; in concrete monism, 
it is insight, where knowledge is penetrated by feeling and 
emotion. Conceptual constructions do not possess the 
certainty of experienced facts. Again, an opinion or 

1 Cl. Bradley, who says that we can reach reality through a kind of 
feeling, and McTaggart, who looks upon love as the most satisfactory way 
of characterising the absolute. 



44 INDIAN PHILOSOPHY 

logical view becomes truth only if it stands the test 
of life. 

" Darsana ” is a word which is conveniently vague, as 
it stands for a dialectical defence of extreme monism as 
well as the intuitional truth on which it is based. Philo- 
sophically " darsana ” is putting the intuition to proof and 
propagating it logically. Even in other systems it applies 
to the logical exposition of the truth that could be had in 
conceptual terms with or without the aid of any vivifying 
intuition. “ Darsana ” so applies to all views of reality 
taken by the mind of man, and if reality is one, the different 
views attempting to reveal the same must agree with each 
other. They cannot have anything accidental or contingent, 
but must reflect the different view-points obtained of the one 
real. By a close consideration of the several views our mind 
gets by snap-shotting reality from different points, we rise 
to the second stage of a full rendering of reality in logical 
terms. When we realise the inadequacy of a conceptual 
account to reality, we try to seize the real by intuition, where 
the intellectual ideas are swallowed up. It is then that we 
are said to get the pure “ being ” of extreme monism from 
which we get back to the logical real of thought, which again 
we begin to spell letter by letter in the different systems 
themselves. “ Dariana ” as applicable to this last means 
any scientific account of reality. It is the one word that 
stands for all the complex inspiration of philosophy by its 
beautiful vagueness. 

A " darsana ” is a spiritual perception, a whole view 
revealed to the soul sense. This soul sight, which is possible 
only when and where philosophy is lived, is the distinguishing 
mark of a true philosopher. So the highest triumphs of 
philosophy are possible only to those who have achieved 
in themselves a purity of soul. This purity is based upon 
a profound acceptance of experience, realised only when some 
point of hidden strength within man, from which he can not 
only inspect but comprehend life, is found. From this inner 
source the philosopher reveals to us the truth of life, a truth 
which mere intellect is unable to discover. The vision 
is produced almost as naturally as a fruit from a flower out 
of the mysterious centre where all experience is reconciled. 



INTRODUCTION 


45 


The seeker after truth must satisfy certain essential 
conditions before he sets out on his quest. Samkara, in his 
commentary on the first Sutra of the Vedanta Sutras, makes 
out that four conditions are essential for any student of 
philosophy. The first condition is a knowledge of the 
distinction between the eternal and the non-eternal. This 
does not mean full knowledge, w r hich can come only at the 
end, but only a metaphysical bent which does not accept 
all it sees to be absolutely real, a questioning tendency in 
the inquirer. He must have the inquiring spirit to probe 
all things, a burning imagination which could extract a truth 
from a mass of apparently disconnected data, and a habit 
of meditation which will not allow his mind to dissipate 
itself. The second condition is the subjugation of the desire 
for the fruits of action either in the present life or a future 
one. It demands the renunciation of all petty desire, personal 
motive and practical interest. Speculation or inquiry to 
the reflective mind is its own end. The right employment 
of intellect is understanding the things, good as well as bad. 
The philosopher is a naturalist who should follow the move- 
ment of things without exaggerating the good or belittling 
the evil on behalf of some prejudice of his. He must stand 
outside of life and look on it. So it is said that he must have 
no love of the present or the future. Only then can he stake 
his all on clear thinking and honest judgment and develop 
an impersonal cosmic outlook with devotedness to fact. 
To get this temper he must suffer a change of heart, which 
is insisted on in the third condition, where the student is 
enjoined to acquire tranquillity, self-restraint, renunciation, 
patience, peace of mind and faith. Only a trained mind which 
utterly controls the body can inquire and meditate endlessly 
so long as life remains, never for a moment losing sight of 
the object, never for a moment letting it be obscured by any 
terrestrial temptation. The seeker after truth must have the 
necessary courage to lose all for his highest end. So is he 
required to undergo hard discipline, spurn pleasure, suffer 
sorrow and contempt. A spiritual discipline which includes 
pitiless self-examination will enable the seeker to reach his 
end of freedom. The desire for moksa or release is the fourth 
condition. The metaphysically minded man who has given 



46 INDIAN PHILOSOPHY 

up all his desires and trained his mind has only one devouring 
desire to achieve the end or reach the eternal. The people 
of India have such an immense respect for these philosophers 
who glory in the might of knowledge and the power of intellect, 
that they worship them. The prophetic souls who with a 
noble passion for truth strive hard to understand the mystery 
of the world and give utterance to it, spending laborious 
days and sleepless nights, are philosophers in a vital sense 
of the term. They comprehend experience on behalf of 
mankind, and so the latter are eternally grateful to them. 

Reverence for the past is another national trait. There 
is a certain doggedness of temperament, a stubborn loyalty 
to lose nothing in the long march of the ages. When 
confronted with new cultures or sudden extensions of know- 
ledge, the Indian does not yield to the temptations of the 
hour, but holds fast to his traditional faith, importing as much 
as possible of the new into the old. This conservative 
liberalism is the secret of the success of Indian culture and 
civilisation. Of the great civilisations of the world, hoary 
with age, only the Indian still survives. The magnificence 
of the Egyptian civilisation can be learnt only from the 
reports of the archeologists and the readings of the hiero- 
glyphics ; the Babylonian Empire, with its marvels of scientific, 
irrigation and engineering skill, is to-day notliing more than a 
heap of ruins ; the great Roman culture, with its political 
institutions and ideals of law and equality, is, to a large extent, 
a thing of the past. The Indian civilisation, which even at the 
lowest estimate is 4,000 years old, still survives in its essential 
features. Her civilisation, dating back to the period of the 
Vedas, is young and old at the same time. She has been 
renewing her youth whenever the course of history demanded 
it. When a change occurs, it is not consciously felt to be 
a change. It is achieved, and all the time it professes to be 
only a new name for an old way of thinking. In the Rgveda 
we shall see how the religious consciousness of the Aryan 
invaders takes note of the conceptions of the people of the 
soil. In the Atharva Veda we find that the vaguer cosmic 
deities are added to the gods of the sky and sun, fire and wind 
worshipped by the Aryan peoples from the Ganges to the 
Hellespont. The Upanisads are regaided as a revival or 



INTRODUCTION 


47 


rather a realisation of something found already in the Vedic 
hymns. The Bhagavadgita professes to sum up the teachings 
of the Upanisads. We have in the Epics the meeting-point 
of the religious conceptions of the highest import with the 
early nature worship. To respect the spirit of reverence 
in man for the ancient makes for the success of the new. 1 
The old spirit is maintained, though not the old forms. This 
tendency to preserve the type has led to the fashionable 
remark that India is immobile. The mind of man never 
stands still, though it admits of no absolute breach with the 
past. 

This respect for the past has produced a regular continuity 
in Indian thought, where the ages are bound each to each 
by natural piety. The Hindu culture is a product of ages 
of change wrought by hundreds of generations, of which some 
are long, stale and sad, and others short, quick and joyous, 
where each has added something of quality to the great 
rich tradition which is yet alive, though it bears within it 
the marks of the dead past. The career of Indian philosophy 
has been compared to the course of a stream which, tumbling 
joyfully from its source among the northern mountain tops, 
rushes through the shadowy valleys and plains, catching 
the lesser streams in its imperious current, till it sweeps 
increased to majesty and serene power through the lands and 
peoples whose fortunes it affects, bearing a thousand ships 
on its bosom. Who knows whether and when this mighty 
stream which yet flows on with tumult and rejoicing will 
pass into the ocean, the father of all streams ? 

There are not wanting Indian thinkers who look upon the 
whole of Indian philosophy as one system of continuous 
revelation. They believe that each civilisation is working 
out some divine thought which is natural to it. a There is 

i Cf. " This claim of a new thing to be old is, in varying degrees, a 
common characteristic of great movements. The Reformation professed to 
be a return to the Bible, the Evangelical movement in England a return 
to the Gospels, the High Church movement a return to the Early Church. 
A large element even in the French Revolution, the greatest of all breaches 
with the past, had for its ideal a return to Roman republican virtue or to 
the simplicity of the natural man ” (Gilbert Murray, Four Stages of Greek 
Religion, p. 58). 

* The Greeh= call this special quality of each people their “ nature,” 
and the Indians call it their “ dharma." 



48 INDIAN PHILOSOPHY 

an immanent teleology which shapes the life of each human 
race towards some complete development. The several 
views set forth in India are considered to be the branches 
of the self-same tree. The short cuts and blind alleys are 
somehow reconciled with the main road of advance to the 
truth. A familiar way in which the six orthodox systems 
are reconciled is to say that just as a mother in pointing out 
the moon to the baby speaks of it as the shining circle at the 
top of the tree, which is quite intelligible to the child, without 
mentioning the immense distance separating the earth from 
the moon which would have bewildered it, even so are 
different views given to suit the varying weakness of human 
understanding. Tire Prabodhacandrodaya, a philosophic 
drama, states that the six systems of Hindu philosophy 
are not mutually exclusive, but establish from various points 
of view the glory of the same uncreate God. They together 
form the living focus of the scattered rays that the 
many-faceted humanity reflects from the splendid sun. 
Madhava’s Sarvadarsanasamgraha (a.d. 1380) sketches 
sixteen systems of thought so as to exhibit a gradually 
ascending series, culminating in the Advaita Vedanta (or 
non-dualism). In the spirit of Hegel, he looks upon the history 
of Indian philosophy as a progressive effort towards a fully 
articulated conception of the world. The truth is unfolded 
bit by bit in the successive systems, and complete truth is 
reflected only when the series of philosophies is completed. 
In the Advaita Vedanta are the many lights brought to 
a single focus. Vijnanabhiksu, the sixteenth -century 
theologian and thinker, holds that all systems are authori- 
tative, 1 and reconciles them by distinguishing practical 
from metaphysical truth, and looks upon Samkhya as the 
final expression of truth. Madhusudana Sarasvati in his 
Prasthanabheda writes : " The ultimate scope of all the 
munis, authors of these different systems, is to support the 
theory of maya, and their only design is to establish the 
existence of one supreme God, the sole essence, for these 
munis could not be mistaken, since they were omniscient. 
But as they saw that men, addicted to the pursuit of external 
objects, could not all at once penetrate into the highest 
1 Sarvagainaprarr.apya. 



INTRODUCTION 


49 


truths, they held out to them a variety of theories in order 
that they might not fall into atheism. Misunderstanding 
the object which the munis thus had in view, and representing 
that they even designed to propound doctrines contrary 
to the Vedas, men have come to regard the specific doctrines 
of these several schools with preference, and thus became 
adherents of a variety of systems.” 1 This reconciliation of 
the several systems, 1 is attempted by almost all the critics 
and commentators. The difference is only about what they 
regard as the truth. Defenders of Nyaya like Udayana 
look upon Nyaya, and theists like Ramanuja consider 
theism to be the truth. It is in accordance with the spirit 
of Indian culture to think that the several currents of thought 
flowing in its soil will discharge their waters into the one river 
whose flood shall make for the City of God. 

From the beginning the Indian felt that truth was many- 
sided, and different views contained different aspects of truth 
which no one could fully express. He was therefore tolerant 
and receptive of other views. He was fearless in accepting 
even dangerous doctrines so long as they were backed up 
by logic. He would not allow to die, if he could help it, 
one jot or tittle of the tradition, but would try to accommodate 
it all. Several cases of such tolerant treatment we shall 
meet with in the course of our study. Of course there are 
dangers incident to such a breadth of view. Often it has 
led the Indian thinkers into misty vagueness, lazy acceptance 
and cheap eclecticism. 


Ill 

Some Charges Against Indian Philosophy 

The main charges against Indian philosophy are those of 
pessimism, dogmatism, indifference to ethics and unpro- 
gressiveness. 

Almost every critic of Indian philosophy and culture 
harps on its pessimism. 3 We cannot, however, understand 

1 See JIuir, O.S.T., iv. i and 2. 

* Sarvadarsana-a'iiarasya. 

J Chailley, in Ins Administrative Problems (p. 67), asserts that IndiaD 
philosophy springs “ from lassitude aad a desire for eternal rest." 



50 


INDIAN PHILOSOPHY 


how the human mind can speculate freely and remodel life 
when it is filled with weariness and overcome by a feeling 
of hopelessness. A priori, the scope and freedom of Indian 
thought are inconsistent with an ultimate pessimism Indian 
philosophy is pessimistic if by pessimism is meant a sense 
of dissatisfaction with what is or exists. In this sense 
all philosophy is pessimistic. The suffering of the world 
provokes the problems of philosophy and religion. Systems 
of religion which emphasise redemption seek for an escape 
from life as we live it on earth. But reality in its essence 
is not evil. In Indian philosophy the same word “ sat ” 
indicates both reality and perfection. Truth and goodness, 
or more accurately reality and perfection, go together. The 
real is also the supremely valuable, and this is the basis of 
all optimism. Professor Bosanquet writes : “ I believe in 
optimism, but I add that no optimism is worth its salt that 
does not go all the way with pessimism and arrive at a point 
beyond it. This, I am convinced, is the true spirit of life ; 
and if any one thinks it dangerous, and an excuse for un- 
justifiable acquiescence in evil, I reply that all truth which 
has any touch of thoroughness has its danger for practice.” 1 
Indian thinkers are pessimistic in so far as they look upon 
the world order as an evil and a lie ; they are optimistic since 
they feel that there is a way out of it into the realm of truth, 
which is also goodness. 

Indian philosophy, it is said, is nothing if not dogmatic, and 
true philosophy cannot subsist with the acceptance of dogma. 
The course of our study of Indian thought will be an answer 
to this charge. Many of the systems of philosophy discuss 
the problem of knowledge, its origin, and validity as a 
preliminary to a study of other problems. It is true that the 
Veda or the sruti is generally considered to be an authoritative 
source of knowledge. But a philosophy becomes dogmatic 
only if the assertions of the Veda are looked upon as superior 
to the evidence of the senses and the conclusions of reason. 


* Soual and International Ideals, p. 43. Cf. Schopenhauer: "Optimism, 
when it is not merely the thoughtless talk of such as harbour nothing but 
words under their low foreheads, appears not merely as an absurd but 
also as a really wicked way of thinking, as a bitter mockery of the 
unspeakable suffering humanity.” 



INTRODUCTION 


51 


The Vedic statements are aptavacana, or sayings of the 
wise, which we are called upon to accept, if we feel convinced 
that those wise had better means than we have of forming 
a judgment on the matter in question. Generally, these 
Vedic truths refer to the experiences of the seers, which any 
rational rendering of reality must take into account. These 
intuitional experiences are within the possibility of all men 
if only they will to have them. 1 The appeal to the Vedas 
does not involve any reference to an extra-philosophical 
standard. What is dogma to the ordinary man is experience 
to the pure in heart. It is true that when we reach the 
stage of the later commentaries we have a state of philoso- 
phical orthodoxy, when speculation becomes an academic 
defence of accepted dogmas. The earlier systems also call 
themselves exegetical and profess to be commentaries on 
the old texts, but they never tended to become scholastic, 
since the Upanisads to which they looked for inspiration 
were many-sided * After the eighth century philosophical 
controversy became traditional and scholastic in character, 
and we miss the freedom of the earlier era. The founders 
of the schools are canonised, and so questioning their opinions 
is little short of sacrilege and impiety. The fundamental 
propositions are settled once for all, and the function of the 
teacher is only to transmit the beliefs of the school with such 
changes as his brain can command and the times require. 
We have fresh arguments for foregone conclusions, new 
expedients to meet new difficulties and a re-establishment 
of the old with a little change of front or twist of dialectic 
There is less of meditation on the deep problems of life and 
more of discussion of the artificial ones. The treasure that 
is the tradition clogs us with its own burdensome wealth, 
and philosophy ceases to move and sometimes finds it hard 
to breathe at all. The charge of unprofitableness urged in 
general against the whole of Indian philosophy may have 
some point when applied to the wordy disquisitions of the 
commentators who are not the inspired apostles of life and 
beauty which the older generation of philosophers were, 
but professional dialecticians conscious of their mission 
to mankind. Yet even under the inevitable crust of age the 
1 See S.B.V.S., iii. 2. 24. * ViSvatomukhalj. 

. -r r 

A i J *£ A- tl 



52 INDIAN PHILOSOPHY 

soul remains young, and now and then breaks through and 
sprouts into something green and tender. There arise men 
like fsamkara or Madhava, who call themselves commentators, 
and yet perceive the spiritual principle which directs the 
movements of the world. 

It is often urged against Indian philosophy that it is 
nonethical in character. “ There is practically no ethical 
philosophy within the frontiers of Hindu thinking.” 1 The 
charge, however, cannot be sustained. Attempts to fill the 
whole of life v/ith the power of spirit are common. Next to 
the category of reality, that of dharma is the most important 
concept in Indian thought. So far as the actual ethical 
content is concerned. Buddhism, Jainism and Hinduism 
are not inferior to others. Ethical perfection is the first step 
towards divine knowledge. 

Philosophy in India, it is said, remains stationary and 
represents an endless process of threshing old straw. “ The 
unchanging East ” connotes that in India time has ceased 
to fly and remained motionless for ever. If it means that 
there is a fundamental identity in the problems, then this sort 
of unprogressiveness is a feature common to all philosophical 
developments. The same old problems of God, freedom and 
immortality and the same old unsatisfactory solutions are 
repeated throughout the centuries. While the form of the 
problems is the same, the matter has changed. There is 
all the difference in the world between the God of the Vedic 
hymns drinking soma, and the Absolute of fsamkara. The 
situations to which philosophy is a response renew themselves 
in each generation, and the effort to deal with them needs 
a corresponding renewal. If the objection means that there 
is not much fundamental difference between the solutions 
given in the ancient scriptures of India and Plato’s works 
or Christian writings, it only show's that the same loving 
universal Spirit has been uttering its message and making 
its voice heard from time to time. The sacred themes come 
down to us through the ages variously balanced and coloured 
by race and tradition. If it means that there is a certain 
reverence for the past which impels the Indian thinkers to pour 
new wine into old bottles, we have already said that this 

■ Farquhar, Hibbert Journal, October 1921, p. 24. 



INTRODUCTION 


53 


is a characteristic of the Indian mind. The way to grow is to 
take in all the good that has gone before and add to it some- 
thing more. It is to inherit the faith of the fathers and 
modify it by the spirit of the time. If Indian thought is 
said to be futile because it did not take into account the 
progress of the sciences, it is the futility which all old things 
possess in the eyes of the new. The scientific developments 
have not brought about as great a change in the substance 
of philosophy as this criticism assumes. The theories so 
revolutionary in their scientific aspects as the biological 
evolution and the physical relativity have not upset estab- 
lished philosophies, but only confirmed them from fresh fields. 

The charge of unprogressiveness or stationariness holds 
when we reach the stage after the first great commentators. 
The hand of the past grew heavy, initiative was curbed, and 
the work of the scholastics, comparable to that of the 
mediaeval Schoolmen, with the same reverence for authority 
and tradition and the same intrusion of theological prejudice, 
began. The Indian philosopher could have done better 
with greater freedom. To continue the living development 
of philosophy, to keep the current of creative energy flowing, 
contact with the living movements of the world capable 
of promoting real freedom of thought is necessary. Perhaps 
the philosophy of India which lost its strength and vigour 
when her political fortunes met with defeat may derive 
fresh inspiration and a new impulse from the era just dawning 
upon her. If the Indian thinkers combine a love of what is 
old with a thirst for what is true, Indian philosophy may yet 
have a future as glorious as its past. 

IV 

Value of the Study of Indian Philosophy 

It is not merely as a piece of antiquarian investigation 
that Indian thought deserves study. Speculations of 
particular thinkers or the ideas of a past age are not without 
value. Nothing that has ever interested men and women 
can ever wholly lose its vitality. In the thought of the 
Vedic Aryans we witness the wrestlings of powerful minds 



54 


INDIAN PHILOSOPHY 


with the highest problems set to thinking man. In the 
words of Hegel : “ The history of philosophy in its true 
meaning deals not with the past, but with the eternal and 
veritable present ; and in its results resembles, not a museum 
of aberrations of the human intellect, but a pantheon of 
Godlike figures representing various stages of the immanent 
logic of all human thought.” 1 The history of Indian thought 
is not what it seems at first sight, a mere succession of ghostly 
ideas which follow one another in rapid succession. 

It is easy to make sport of philosophy, since to those 
who are content to live among the things of sense and think 
in a slovenly way, philosophic problems wear a look of 
unreality, and possess a flavour of absurdity. The hostile 
critic looks upon the disputes of philosophy as wasteful 
logic-chopping and intellectual legerdemain concerned with 
such conundrums as “ Did the hen come first or the egg ? ” a 
The problems discussed in Indian philosophy have perplexed 
men from the beginning of time, though they have never 
been solved to the satisfaction of all. There seems to be 
an essential human need or longing to know the nature of 
soul and God. Every thinking man, when he reflects on the 
fact that he is swept without pause along the great curve of 
birth to death, the rising flood of life, the ceaseless stream 
of becoming, which presses ever onward and upward, cannot 
but ask, What is the purpose of it all, as a whole, apart from 
the little distracting incidents of the way ? Philosophy 
is no racial idiosyncrasy of India, but a human interest. 

If we lay aside professional philosophy, which may well 
be a futile business, we have in India one of the best logical 
developments of thought. The labours of the Indian thinkers 
are so valuable to the advancement of human knowledge 
that we judge their work to be worthy of study, even if we 
find manifest errors in it. If the sophisms which ruined the 
philosophies of the past are any reason for neglecting them, 
then not only the study of Indian philosophy but of all 
philosophy should be given up. After all, the residuum 
of permanent truth which may be acknowledged as the 


* Logic, p. 137. Wallace’s translation. 

* After all, this question is not so trite or innocent as it appears to be. 
See Samuel Butler’- i.uck or Cunning. 



INTRODUCTION 


55 


effective contribution to human thought even with regard 
to the most illustrious thinkers of the West, like Plato and 
Aristotle, is not very great. It is easy to smile at the exquisite 
rhapsodies of Plato or the dull dogmatism of Descartes or 
the arid empiricism of Hume or the bewildering paradoxes of 
Hegel, and yet withal there is no doubt that we profit by 
the study of their works. Even so, though only a few of 
the vital truths of Indian thinkers have moulded the history 
of the human mind, yet there are general syntheses, systematic 
conceptions put forward by a Badarayana or a fSariikara 
which will remain landmarks of human thought and 
monuments of human genius . 1 

To the Indian student a study of Indian philosophy 
alone can give a right perspective about the past of India. 
At the present day the average Hindu looks upon his past 
systems, Buddhism, Advaitism, Dvaitism, as all equally 
worthy and acceptable to reason. The authors of the systems 
are worshipped as divine. A study of Indian philosophy 
will conduce to the clearing up of the situation, the adopting 
of a more balanced outlook and the freeing of the mind from 
the oppressing sense of the perfection of everything that is 
ancient. This freedom from bondage to authority is an ideal 
worth striving at. For when the enslaved intellect is freed, 
original thinking and creative effort might again be possible. 
It may be a melancholy satisfaction to the present day Indian 

1 Many scholars of the West recognise the value of Indian philosophy. 
“ On the other hand, when we read with attention the poetical and philoso- 
phical movements of the East, above all those of India, which are beginning 
to spread in Europe, we discover there so many truths, and truths so pro- 
found, and which make such a contrast with the meanness of the results 
at which the European genius has sometimes stopped, that we are con- 
strained to bend the knee before that of the East, and to see in this cradle 
of the human race the native land of the highest philosophy ” (Victor 
Cousin). “ If I were to ask myself from what literature, we here in Europe, 
we who have been nurtured almost exclusively on the thoughts of Greeks 
and Romans, and of one Semitic race, the Jewish, may draw that corrective 
which is most wanted, in order to make our inner life more perfect, more 
comprehensive, more universal, in fact more truly human, a life, not for 
this life only, but a transfigured and eternal life — again, I should point to 
India ” (Max Muller). “ Among nations possessing indigenous philosophy 
and metaphysics, together with an innate relish for these pursuits, such 
as at present characterises Germany, and in olden times was the proud 
distinction of Greece, Hindustan holds the first rank in point of time " 
(Ibid.' 



56 INDIAN PHILOSOPHY 

to know some details of his country’s early history. Old 
men console themselves with the stories of their youth, and 
the way to forget the bad present is to read about the good 
past. 

V 

Periods of Indian Thought 

It is necessary to give some justification for the title 
" Indian Philosophy,” when we are discussing the philosophy 
of the Hindus as distinct from that of the other communities 
which have also their place in India. The most obvious 
reason is that of common usage. India even to-day is mainly 
Hindu. And we are concerned here with the history of 
Indian thought up till a.d. iooo or a little after, when the 
fortunes of the Hindus became more and more linked with 
those of the non-Hindus. 

To the continuous development of Indian thought different 
peoples at different ages have brought their gifts, yet the 
force of the Indian spirit had its own shaping influence on 
them. It is not possible for us to be sure of the exact chrono- 
logical development, though we shall try to view Indian 
thought from the historical point of view. The doctrines 
of particular schools are relative to their environment and 
have to be viewed together. Otherwise, they will cease to 
have any living interest for us and become dead traditions. 
Each system of philosophy is an answer to a positive question 
which its age has put to itself, and when viewed from its own 
angle of vision will be seen to contain some truth. The philo- 
sophies are not sets of propositions conclusive or mistaken, 
but the expression and evolution of a mind with which and 
in which we must live if we wish to know how the systems 
shaped themselves. We must recognise the solidarity of 
philosophy with history, of intellectual life with the social 
conditions . 1 The historical method requires us not to take 

1 In the image of Walter Pater. “ As the strangely twisted pine-tree, 
which would be a freak of nature on an English lawn, is seen, if we replace 
it in thought, amid the contending forces of the Alpine torrent that actually 
shaped its growth, to have been the creature of necessity, of the logic of 
certain facts, even so the most fantastic beliefs will assume their natural 
propriety when they are duly correlated with the conditions round them 
of which they are in truth a part ’’ ( Plato and Platonism, p. io). 



INTRODUCTION 57 

sides in the controversy of schools, but follow the development 
with strict indifference. 

While we are keenly alive to the immense importance 
of historical perspective, we regret that on account of the 
almost entire neglect of the chronological sequences of the 
Writings it is not possible for us to determine exactly the 
relative dates of the systems. So unhistorical, or perhaps 
so ultra-philosophical, was the nature of the ancient Indian, 
that we know more about the philosophies than about the 
philosophers. From the time of the birth of Buddha Indian 
chronology is on a better foundation. The rise of Buddhism 
was contemporaneous with the extension of the Persian power 
to the Indus under the dynasty of Achaemenidse in Persia. 
It is said to be the source of the earliest knowledge of India 
in the West obtained by Hecateus and Herodotus. 

The following are the broad divisions of Indian philosophy : 
(i) The Vedic Period (1500 B.C.-600 B.c.) covers the age of 
the settlement of the Aryans and the gradual expanison 
and spread of the Aryan culture and civilisation. It was 
the time which witnessed the rise of the forest universities, 
where were evolved the beginnings of the sublime idealism 
of India. We discern in it successive strata of thought, 
signified by the Mantras or the hymns, the Brahmanas, and 
the Upanisads. The views put forward in this age are not 
philosophical in the technical sense of the term. It is the 
age of groping, where superstition and thought are yet in 
conflict. Yet to give order and continuity to the subject, 
it is necessary for us to begin with an account of the outlook 
of the hymns of the Rg-Veda and discuss the views of the 
Upanisads. 

(2) The Epic Period (600 B.c. to a.d. 200) extends over 
the development between the early Upanisads and the 
darsanas or the systems of philosophy. The epics of the 
Ramayana and the Mahabharata serve as the vehicles 
through which was conveyed the new message of the heroic 
and the godly in human relations. In this period we have 
also the great democratisation of the Upanisad ideas in 
Buddhism and the Bhagavadglta. The religious systems 
of Buddhism, Jainism, Saivism, Vaisnavism belong to this 
age. The development of abstract thought which culminated 



58 


INDIAN PHILOSOPHY 


in the schools of Indian philosophy, the darsanas, belongs 
to this period. Most of the systems had their early begin- 
nings about the period of the rise of Buddhism, and they 
developed side by side through many centuries; yet the 
systematic works of the schools belong to a later age. 

(3) The Sutra Period (from A.D. 200) comes next. The 
mass of material grew so unwieldy that it was found necessary 
to devise a shorthand scheme of philosophy. This reduction 
and summarisation occurred in the form of Sutras. These 
Sutras are unintelligible without commentaries, so much so 
that the latter have become more important than the Sutras 
themselves. Here we have the critical attitude in philosophy 
developed. In the preceding periods we have philosophical 
discussions, no doubt, where the mind did not passively 
receive whatever it was told, but played round the subject, 
raising objections and answering them. By happy intuition 
the thinkers pitch upon some general principles which seem 
to them to explain all aspects of the universe. The philoso- 
phical syntheses, however profound and acute they may 
be, suffered throughout from the defect of being pre-critical, 
in the Kantian sense of the term. Without a previous 
criticism of the human capacity to solve philosophical 
problems, the mind looked at the world and reached its 
conclusions. The earlier efforts to understand and interpret 
the world were not strictly philosophical attempts, since 
they were not troubled by any scruples about the com- 
petence of the human mind or the efficiency of the instru- 
ments and the criteria employed. As Caird puts it, mind 
was “ too busy with the object to attend to itself.” 1 So 
when we come to the Sutras we have thought and reflection 
become self-conscious, and not merely constructive imagina- 
tion and religious freedom. Among the systems themselves, 
we cannot say definitely which are earlier and which later. 
There are cross-references throughout. The Yoga accepts 
the Samkhya, the Vaisesika recognises both the Nyaya 
and the Sarnkhya. Nyaya refers to the Vedanta and the 
Samkhya. Mimamsa directly or indirectly recognises the 
pre-existence of all others. So does the Vedanta. Professor 
Garbe holds that the Samkhya is the oldest school. Next 

' Critical Philosophy oj Kant, vol. i. p. 2 



INTRODUCTION 


59 


came Yoga, next Mlmaiiisa and Vedanta, and last of all 
Vaisesika and Nyaya. The Sutra period cannot be sharply 
distinguished from the scholastic period of the commentators. 
The two between them extend up till the present day. 

(4) The Scholastic Period also dates from the second 
century a.d. It is not possible for us to draw a hard and 
fast line between this and the previous one. Yet it is to this 
that the great names of Kumarila, Samkara, £ridhara, Rama- 
nuja, Madhva, Vacaspati, Udayana, Bhaskara, Jayanta, 
Vijnanabhiksu and Raghunatha belong. The literature soon 
becomes grossly polemical. We find a brood of schoolmen, 
noisy controversialists indulging in over-subtle theories 
and fine-spun arguments, who fought fiercely over the nature 
of logical universals. Many Indian scholars dread opening 
their tomes which more often confuse than enlighten us. 
None would deny their acuteness and enthusiasm. Instead 
of thought we find words, instead of philosophy logic-chopping . 
Obscurity of thought, subtlety of logic, intolerance of 
disposition, mark the worst type of the commentators. The 
better type, of course, are quite as valuable as the ancient 
thinkers themselves. Commentators like Sarhkara and 
Ramanuja re-state the old doctrine, and their restatement 
is just as valuable as a spiritual discovery. 

There are some histories of Indian philosophy written 
by Indian thinkers. Almost all later commentators from 
their own points of view discuss other doctrines. In that 
way every commentator happens to give an idea of the other 
views. Sometimes conscious attempts are made to deal 
with the several systems in a continuous manner. Some 
of the chief of these " historical ” accounts may here be 
mentioned. Saddarsanasamuccaya, or the epitome of 
the six systems, is the name of a work by Haribhadra. 1 

1 Mr. Barth says : " Haribhadra, who according to tradition died in 
a.d. 529, but by more exact testimony lived in the ninth century, and who 
had several homonyms, was a Brahmin converted to Jainism. He is famous 
still as the author of Fourteen Hundred Prabandhas (chapters of works), 
and seems to have been one of the first to introduce the Sanskrit language 
into the scholastic literature of the Svetambara Jains. By the six systems 
the Brahmins understand the two MImamsas, the Samkhya and the Yoga, 
the Ny 5 ya and the Vai£e§ika. Haribhadra, on the other hand, expounds 
under this title very curtly in eighty-seven slokas, but quite impartially, the 
essential principles of the Buddhists, the Jainas, the followers of the Nyaya, 

3 


VOL. 1 



60 INDIAN PHILOSOPHY 

Samantabhadra, a Digambara Jain of the sixth century, is 
said to have written a work called Aptamimamsa, containing 
a review of the various philosophical schools. 1 A Madhya- 
mika Buddhist, by name Bhavaviveka, is reputed to be the 
author of a work called Tarkaj vala, a criticism of the Mimamsa, 
Samkhya, Vaisesika and Vedanta schools. A Digambara 
Jain, by name Vidyananda, in his Astasahasri, and another 
Digambara, by name Merutunga, in his work on Saddarsana- 
vicara (1300 a.d.) are said to have criticised the Hindu 
systems. The most popular account of Indian philosophy 
is the Sarvadarsanasamgraha, by the well-known Vedantin 
Madhavacarya, who lived in the fourteenth century in 
South India. The Sarvasiddhantasarasamgraha assigned to 
Sarhkara, 2 and the Prasthananabheda by Madhusudana 
Sarasvatl ,3 contain useful accounts of the different 
philosophies. 

the Samkhya, the Vaisesika and the MImamssi. He thus selects his own school 
and those with whom the Jainas had the closest affinities, and puts them 
in between the schools of their greatest enemies, the Buddhists and the 
ritualists of the school of Jaimini. These last he couples with the Loka- 
yatikas, the atheistic materialists, not simply from sectarian fanaticism 
and on his own judgment, but following an opinion that was then prevalent 
even among the Brahmins ” (Indian Antiquary, p. 66, 1895). 

• Vidyabhuslian, Mediceval Systems of Indian Logic, pp. 23. 

3 The ascription seems to be incorrect. See Keith : Indian Logic, 
p 242, «. 3. 

1 See Max Muller, Six Systems, pp. 75 to 84. 



PART I 

THE VEDIC PERIOD 




CHAPTER II 


THE HYMNS OF THE RG-VEDA 


The four Vedas — The parts of the Veda, the Mantras, the Brahmanas, 
the Upanisads — The importance of the study of the hymns — Date and 
authorship — Different views of the teaching of the hymns — Then- 
philosophical tendencies — Religion — " Deva ” — Naturalism and an- 
thropomorphism — Heaven and Earth — Varuna — Rta — Surya — Usas 
— Soma — Yama — Indra — Minor gods and goddesses — Classification 
of the Vedic deities — Monotheistic tendencies — The unity of nature — 
The unifying impulse of the logical mind — The implications of the 
religious consciousness — Henotheism — Visvakarman, Brhaspati, Pra- 
japati and Hiraijyagarbha — The rise of reflection and criticism — The 
philosophical inadequacy of monotheism — Monism — Philosophy and 
religion — The cosmological speculations of the Vedic hymns — The 
Nasadiya Sukta — The relation of the world to the Absolute — The 
Purusa Sukta — Practical religion — Prayer — Sacrifice — The ethical 
rules — Karma — Asceticism — Caste — Future life — The two paths of 
the gods and the fathers — Hell — Rebirth — Conclusion. 


I 

The Vedas 

The Vedas are the earliest documents of the human mind 
that we possess. Wilson writes : ‘‘When the texts of the 
Rg and Yajur Vedas are completed, we shall be in the 
possession of materials sufficient for the safe appreciation 
of the results to be derived from them, and of the actual 
condition of the Hindus, both political and religious, at a 
date co-eval with that of the yet earliest known records of 
social organisation — long anterior to the dawn of Grecian 
civilisation — prior to the oldest vestiges of the Assyrian 
Empire yet discovered — contemporary probably with the 
oldest Hebrew writings, and posterior only to the Egyptian 
dynasties, of which, however, we yet know little except 
barren names; the Vedas give us abundant information 



64 INDIAN PHILOSOPHY 

respecting all that is most interesting in the contem- 
plation of antiquity.” 1 There are four Vedas: Rg, Yajur, 
Sama and Atharva. The first three agree not only in 
their name, form and language, but in their contents also. 
Of them all the Rg-Veda is the chief. The inspired songs 
which the Aryans brought with them from their earlier home 
into India as their most precious possession were collected, 
it is generally held, in response to a prompting to treasure 
them up which arose when the Aryans met with large num- 
bers of the worshippers of other gods in their new country. 
The Rg-Veda is that collection. The Sama-Veda is a purely 
liturgical collection. Much of it is found in the Rg-Veda, 
and even those hymns peculiar to it have no distinctive 
lessons of their own. They are all arranged for being sung 
at sacrifices. The Yajur-Veda, like the Sama, also serves a 
liturgical purpose. This collection was made to meet the 
demands of a ceremonial religion. Whitney writes : “ In 
the early Vedic times the sacrifice was still, in the main, 
an unfettered act of devotion, not committed to the charge 
of a body of privileged priests, not regulated in its minor 
details, but left to the free impulses of him who offered it, 
accompanied with Rg and Sama hymns and chants, that 
the mouth of the offerer might not be silent while his 
hands were presenting to the divinity the gift which his 
heart prompted. ... As in process of time, however, the 
ritual assumed a more and more formal character, becoming 
finally a strictly and minutely regulated succession of single 
actions, not only were the verses fixed which were to be 
quoted during the ceremony, but there established them- 
selves likewise a body of utterances, formulas of words, 
intended to accompany each individual action of the whole 
work to explain, excuse, bless, give it a symbolical signifi- 
cance or the like. . . . These sacrificial formulas received 
the name of Yajus, from the root Yaj, to sacrifice. . . . 
The Yajur-Veda is made up of these formulas, partly in 
prose and partly in verse, arranged in the order in which 
they were to be made use of at the sacrifice.” 3 The collec- 
tions of the Sama and the Yajur Vedas must have been 

* J.R.A.S., vol. 13, 1852, p. 206. 

• A.O.S. Proceedings, vol. iii. p. 304. 



THE HYMNS OF THE RG-VEDA 65 

made in the interval between the Rg-Vedic collection 
and the Brahmanical period, when the ritualistic religion 
was well established. The Atharva-Veda for a long time 
was without the prestige of a Veda, though for our purposes 
it is next in importance only to the Rg-Veda, for, like it, 
it is an historical collection of independent contents. A 
different spirit pervades this Veda, which is the produc- 
tion of a later era of thought. It shows the result of 
the compromising spirit adopted by the Vedic Aryans in 
view of the new gods and goblins worshipped by the 
original peoples of the country whom they were slowly 
subduing. 

Each Veda consists of three parts known as Mantras, 
Brahmanas and Upanisads. The collection of the mantras 
or the hymns is called the Samhita. The Brahmanas 
include the precepts and religious duties. The Upanisads 
and the Aranyakas are the concluding portions of the 
Brahmanas which discuss philosophical problems. The 
Upanisads contain the mental background of the whole 
of the subsequent thought of the country. Of the early 
Upanisads Aitareya and Kausltaki belong to the Rg, 
Kena and Chandogya to the Sama, Isa and Taittiriya and 
the Brhadaranyaka to the Yajur, and Prasna and Mundaka 
to the Atharva-Veda. The Aranyakas come between the 
Brahmanas and the Upanisads, and, as their name implies, 
are intended to serve as objects of meditation for those who 
live in forests. The Brahmanas discuss the ritual to be 
observed by the householder, but when in his old age he 
resorts to the forests, some substitute for ritual is needed, 
and that is supplied in the Aranyakas. The symbolic and 
spiritual aspects of the sacrificial cult are meditated upon, 
and this meditation takes the place of the performance of 
the sacrifice. The Aranyakas form the transition link 
between the ritual of the Brahmanas and the philosophy 
of the Upanisads. While the hymns are the creation of 
the poets , 1 the Brahmanas are the work of the priests, and 
the Upanisads the meditations of the philosophers. The 
religion of nature of the hymns, the religion of law of the 
Brahmanas and the religion of spirit of the Upanisads, 

« R.V., i. 1G4. 6. ; x. 129. 4. 



66 


INDIAN PHILOSOPHY 


correspond in a very close way to the three great divisions 
in the Hegelian conception of the development of religion. 
Though at a later stage the three have existed side by 
side, there is no doubt that they were originally developed 
in successive periods. The Upanisads, while in one sense 
a continuation of the Vedic worship, are in another a pro- 
test against the religion of the Brahmanas. 


II 

Importance of the Study of the Vedic Hymns 

A study of the hymns of the Rg-Veda is indispensable 
for any adequate account of Indian thought. Whatever 
we may think them, half-formed myths or crude allegories, 
obscure gropings or immature compositions, still they are 
the source of the later practices and philosophies of the 
Indo-Aryans, and a study of them is necessary for a proper 
understanding of subsequent thought. We find a freshness 
and simplicity and an inexplicable charm as of the breath 
of the spring or the flower of the morning about these first 
efforts of the human mind to comprehend and express 
the mystery of the world. 

The text of the Veda which we possess has come to us 
from that period of intellectual activity when the Aryans 
found their way into India from their original home. They 
brought with them certain notions and beliefs which were 
developed and continued on the Indian soil. A long 
interval must have elapsed between the composition and 
the compilation of these hymns. Max Muller divides the 
Samhita period into the two called the Chandas and the 
Mantra periods . 1 In the former the hymns were com- 
posed. It was the creative epoch characterised by real 
poetry, when men’s emotions poured themselves out in 
songs ; we have then no traces of sacrifices. Prayer was 
the only offering made to the gods. The second is the 
period of collection or systematic grouping. It was then 

* Attempts are sometimes made to assign the hymns to five different 
periods marked by differences of religious belief and social custom. See 
Arnold: Vedic Metre. 



THE HYMNS OF THE RG-VEDA 


67 


that the hymns were arranged in practically the same form 
in which we have them at present. In this period sacri- 
ficial ideas slowly developed. When exactly the hymns 
were composed and collected is a matter of conjecture. 
We are sure that they were current some fifteen centuries 
before Christ. Buddhism, which began to spread in India 
about 500 b.c., presupposes not only the existence of the 
Vedic hymns but the whole Vedic literature, including the 
Brahmanas and the Upanisads. For the sacrificial system 
of the Brahmanas to become well established, for the 
philosophy of the Upanisads to be fully developed, it 
would require a long period. 1 The development of thought 
apparent in this vast literature requires at least a millen- 
nium. This is not too long a period if we remember the 
variety and growth which the literature displays. Some 
Indian scholars assign the Vedic hymns to 3000 B.C., others 
to 6000 B.c. The late Mr. Tilak dates the hymns about 
4500 B.c., the Brahmanas 2500 B.C., the early Upanisads 
1600 B.c. Jacobi puts the hymns at 4500 B.c. We assign 
them to the fifteenth century b.c. and trust that our date 
will not be challenged as being too early. 

The Rg-Veda Sarhhita or collection consists of 1,017 
hymns or suktas, covering a total of about 10,600 stanzas. 
It is divided into eight astakas, 2 each having eight adhyayas, 
or chapters, which are further subdivided into vargas or 
groups. It is sometimes divided into ten mandalas or 
circles. The latter is the more popular division. The 
first mandala contains 191 hymns, and is ascribed roughly 
to fifteen different authors or Rsis (seers or sages) such 
as Gautama, Kanva, etc. In the arrangement of the 
hymns there is a principle involved. Those addressed to 
Agni come first, those to Indra second, and then the rest. 
Each of the next six mandalas is ascribed to a single family 
of poets, and has the same arrangement. In the eighth we 
have no definite order. It is ascribed like the first to a 
number of different authors. Mandala nine consists of 
hymns addressed to Soma. Many of the hymns of the eighth 

1 From them many of the technical terms of later philosophies, such as 
Brahman, Atman, Yoga, Mimamsa, are derived. 

* An eighth portion is an a§taka. 

3 * 


VOL. I 



68 


INDIAN PHILOSOPHY 


and ninth Mandalas are found in the Sama-Veda also. 
Mandala ten seems to be a later appendage. At any rate, 
it contains views current at the last period of the develop- 
ment of the Vedic hymns. Here the native hue of the 
earlier devotional poetry is sicklied over with the pale 
cast of philosophic thought. Speculative hymns about the 
origin of creation, etc., are to be met with. Together 
with these abstract theorisings are also found in it the 
superstitious charms and exorcisings belonging to the 
Atharva-Veda period. While the speculative parts indi- 
cate the maturing of the mind which first revealed itself 
in the lyrical hymns, this feature shows that by that time 
the Vedic Aryans must have grown familiar with the 
doctrines and practices of the native Indians, and both 
these are clear indications of the late origin of the tenth 
book. 


Ill 

The Teaching of the Vedas 

Different views of the spirit of the Vedic hymns are 
held by competent scholars who have made these ancient 
scriptures their life study. Pfleiderer speaks of the “ pri- 
maeval child-like naive prayer of Rg-Veda.” Pictet main- 
tains that the Aryans of the Rg-Veda possessed a mono- 
theism, however vague and primitive it might be. Roth 
and Dayananda Sarasvatl, the founder of the Arya Samaj, 
agree with this view. Ram Mohan Roy considers the 
Vedic gods to be “ the allegorical representations of the 
attributes of the supreme Deity.” According to others, 
Bloomfield among them, the hymns of the Rg-Veda are 
sacrificial compositions of a primitive race which attached 
great importance to ceremonial rites. Bergaigne holds 
that they were all allegorical. Sayana, the famous Indian 
commentator, adopts the naturalistic interpretation of the 
gods of the hymns, which is supported by modern Euro- 
pean scholarship. Sayana sometimes interprets the hymns 
in the spirit of the later Brahmanic religion. These vary- 
ing opinions need not be looked upon as antagonistic to 
one another, for they only point to the heterogeneous 



69 


THE HYMNS OF THE RG-VEDA 

nature of the Rg-Veda collection. It is a work repre- 
senting the thought of successive generations of thinkers, 
and so contains within it different strata of thought. In 
the main, we may say that the Rg-Veda represents the 
religion of an unsophisticated age. The great mass of the 
hymns are simple and naive, expressing the religious con- 
sciousness of a mind yet free from the later sophistication. 
There are also hymns which belong to the later formal 
and conventional age of the Brahmanas. There are some, 
especially in the last book, which embody the mature 
results of conscious reflection on the meaning of the world 
and man’s place in it. Monotheism characterises some of 
the hymns of the Rg-Veda. There is no doubt that some- 
times the several gods were looked upon as the different 
names and expressions of the Universal Being . 1 But this 
monotheism is not as yet the trenchant clear-cut mono- 
theism of the modern world. 

Mr. Aurobindo Ghosh, the great Indian scholar-mystic, 
is of opinion that the Vedas are replete with suggestions 
of secret doctrines and mystic philosophies. He looks 
upon the gods of the hymns as symbols of the psycho- 
logical functions. Surya signifies intelligence, Agni will, 
and Soma feeling. The Veda to him is a mystery religion 
corresponding to the Orphic and Eleusinian creeds of 
ancient Greece. “ The hypothesis I propose is that the 
Rg-Veda is itself the one considerable document that 
remains to us from the early period of human thought of 
which the historical Eleusinian and Orphic mysteries were 
the failing remnants, when the spiritual and psychological 
knowledge of the race was concealed for reasons now diffi- 
cult to determine, in a veil of concrete and material figures 
and symbols which protected the sense from the profane 
and revealed it to the initiated. One of the leading princi- 
ples of the mystics was the sacredness and secrecy of self- 
knowledge and the true knowledge of the gods. This 
wisdom was, they thought, unfit for, perhaps even dangerous, 
to the ordinary human mind, or in any case liable to perver- 
sion and misuse and loss of virtue if revealed to vulgar and 
unpurified spirits. Hence they favoured the existence of 

• See R.V., i. 164-46 and 170-71. 



70 INDIAN PHILOSOPHY 

an outer worship effective but imperfect for the profane, 
and an inner discipline for the initiate, and clothed their 
language in words and images which had equally a spiritual 
sense for the elect and a concrete sense for the mass of 
ordinary worshippers. The Vedic hymns were conceived 
and constructed on these principles.” 1 When we find 
that this view is opposed not only to the modern views 
of European scholars but also to the traditional interpre- 
tations of Sayana and the system of Purva-Mimamsa, the 
authority on Vedic interpretation, we must hesitate to 
follow the lead of Mr. Aurobindo Ghosh, however ingenious 
his point of view may be. It is not likely that the whole 
progress of Indian thought has been a steady falling away 
from the highest spiritual truths of the Vedic hymns. It 
is more in accordance with what is known of the general 
nature of human development, and easier to concede that 
the later religions and philosophies arose out of the crude 
suggestions and elementary moral ideas and spiritual aspira- 
tions of the early mind, than that they were a degradation 
of an original perfection. 

In interpreting the spirit of the Vedic hymns we pro- 
pose to adopt the view of them accepted by the Brahmanas 
and the Upanisads, which came immediately after. These 
later works are a continuation and a development of the 
views of the hymns. While we find the progress from the 
worship of outward nature powers to the spiritual religion 
of the Upanisads easily intelligible according to the law 
of normal religious growth — man everywhere on earth 
starts with the external and proceeds to the internal — the 
Upanisads do not care for the early nature worship, but 
only develop the suggestions of the highest religion con- 
tained in the Vedas. This interpretation is in entire har- 
mony with the modem historical method and the scientific 
theory of early human culture, and accords well with the 
classic Indian view as put forth by Sayana. 


* Arya, vol. L p. 6a. 



THE HYMNS OF THE RG-VEDA 


71 


IV 

Philosophical Tendencies 

In the Rg-Veda we have the impassioned utterances 
of primitive but poetic souls which seek some refuge from 
the obstinate questionings of sense and outward things. 
The hymns are philosophical to the extent that they 
attempt to explain the mysteries of the world not by means 
of any superhuman insight or extraordinary revelation, but 
by the light of unaided reason. The mind revealed in the 
Vedic hymns is not of any one type. There were poetic 
souls who simply contemplated the beauties of the sky 
and the wonders of the earth, and eased their musical souls 
of their burden by composing hymns. The Indo-Iranian 
gods of Dyaus, Varuna, Usas, Mitra, etc., were the pro- 
ductions of this poetic consciousness. Others of a more 
active temperament tried to adjust the world to their own 
purposes. Knowledge of the world was useful to them as 
the guide of life. And in the period of conquest and battle, 
such useful utilitarian deities as Indr a were conceived. 
The genuine philosophical impulse, the desire to know 
and understand the world for its own sake, showed itself 
only at the end of this period of storm and stress. It was 
then that men sat down to doubt the gods they ignorantly 
worshipped and reflected on the mysteries of life. It is at 
this period that questions were put to which the mind of 
man could not give adequate answers. The Vedic poet 
exclaims : "I do not know what kind of thing I am ; 
mysterious, bound, my mind wanders.” Even though germs 
of true philosophy appear at a late stage, still the view of 
life reflected in the poetry and practice of the Vedic hymns 
is instructive. As legendary history precedes archaeology, 
alchemy chemistry, and astrology astronomy, even so 
mythology and poetry precede philosophy and science. 
The impulse of philosophy finds its first expression in 
mythology and religion. In them we find the answers to 
the questions of ultimate existence, believed by the people 
in general. These happen to be products of imagination, 



72 


INDIAN PHILOSOPHY 


where mythical causes are assumed to account for the 
actual world. As reason slowly gains ascendancy over 
fancy, an attempt is made to distinguish the permanent 
stuff from out of which the actual things of the world are 
made. Cosmological speculations take the place of mythical 
assumptions. The permanent elements of the world are 
deified, and thus cosmology becomes confused with religion. 
In the early stages of reflection as we have them in the 
Rg-Veda, mythology, cosmology and religion are found 
intermixed. It will be of interest to describe briefly the 
views of the hymns under the four heads of theology, 
cosmology, ethics and eschatology. 


V 

Theology 

A religious growth of many centuries cannot be a simple 
and transparent creed admitting of easy definition and 
classification. A striking aspect of the hymns is their 
polytheistic character. A great many gods are named and 
worshipped. Yet some of the hymns shock us by their 
highly abstract philosophising, and from primitive poly- 
theism to systematic philosophy it is a long, long way. 
Three strata of thought can be discerned in the religion 
of the hymns of the Rg-Veda, which are naturalistic 
polytheism, monotheism and monism. 

An important point to be borne in mind in this dis- 
cussion is that the word “ deva ” is so very elusive in its 
nature and is used to indicate many different things. 1 
“ Deva is one who gives to man.” 2 God is deva because 
He gives the whole world. The learned man who imparts 
knowledge to fellow man is also a deva. 3 The sun, the 
moon and the sky are devas because they give light to 
all creation. Father and mother and spiritual guides are 

1 Tne Nirukta says : “ Devo danad va dlpanad va dyotanad va dyusthano 
va bhavati." vii. 15. 

1 We may compare this with the English word " lady," which seems to 
have meant originally the knead. r oi the loaf. Lord bas a somewhat similar 
origin — the guardian of the loaf. 

3 Vidvaihso hi devalj. 



THE HYMNS OF THE RG-VEDA 73 

also devas . 1 Even a guest is a deva. We have to take 
into account only that notion of deva which answers at 
least roughly to the modern conception of God. It then 
means bright. 

The process of god-making in the factory of man’s 
mind cannot be seen so clearly anywhere else as in the 
Rg-Veda. We have in it the freshness and splendour of 
the morning of man’s mind still undulled by past custom 
or fixed routine. There is no such thing as a beginning 
in the history of ideas, and we have to start somewhere. 
We may begin with the identification of the Vedic gods 
in some of their aspects with certain forces of nature, and 
point out how they were gradually raised to moral and 
superhuman beings. The earliest seers of the Vedic hymns 
delighted in sights of nature in their own simple uncon- 
scious way. Being essentially of a poetic temperament, 
they saw the things of nature with such intensity of feeling 
and force of imagination that the things became suffused 
with souls. They knew what it was to love nature, and 
be lost in the wonders of dawn and sunrise, those 
mysterious processes which effect a meeting of the soul and 
nature. To them nature was a living presence with which 
they could hold communion. Some glorious aspects of 
nature became the windows of heaven, through which the 
divine looked down upon the godless earth. The moon 
and the stars, the sea and the sky, the dawn and the 
nightfall w'ere regarded as divine. This worship of nature 
as such is the earliest form of Vedic religion. 

Soon cold reflection sets in. An unconscious effort to 
penetrate into the inner nature of things results. Man is 
busy making gods in his own image. The religion of the un- 
developed man, the world over, has been a kind of anthro- 
pomorphism. We cannot acquiesce in the chaos of the 
physical world. We try to understand it in some way 
and arrive at some theory of life with the conviction that 
some hypothesis is better than none. Naturally we pro- 
ject our own volitional agency and explain phenomena by 
their spiritual causes . 1 We interpret all things on the 

* Matrdevo bhava, pitrdeno bhava, acaryadevo bhava. 

* As Taylor puts it : “ 'he operations of the world seemed to be carried 
on by other spirits, just as the human body was held to live and act by virtue 



74 


INDIAN PHILOSOPHY 


analogy of our own nature and posit wills behind physical 
phenomena. The theory is not to be confused with 
animism, for it does not hold to a universal animation of 
nature. It is a sort of polytheism where striking pheno- 
mena of nature, of which India is so full, are deified. The 
religious instinct reveals itself in this way. In moments 
of deep religious feeling, when man is delivered from some 
imminent peril, or realises his utter dependence on the 
mighty forces of nature, he feels the reality of the presence 
of God. He hears the voice of God in the tempest and 
sees his hand in the stilling of the wave. So late as the 
period of the Stoics we meet with similar conceptions. 
“ The Sun, Moon and Stars and Law and Men who have 
turned into Gods.” 1 It is a good thing that the Vedic 
Aryan had faith in the reality of an unseen world. He 
had no doubt about it. Gods are. Naturalism and anthro- 
pomorphism seem to be the first stages of the Vedic 
religion. 

It is now a commonplace of history that the Vedic 
Aryans and the Iranians descended from the same stock and 
exhibit great affinities and resemblance. They came down 
from their common home into India and the Iran of the 
Zoroastrians, and in that central home they dwelt as one 
undivided race till the necessities of life, want of room, 
the spirit of adventure, obliged them to leave their 
motherland and wander in quest of new fields in different 
directions.* That is why w r e find so many affinities in the 


of its own inhabiting spirit-soul ” {Primitive Culture). In his Natural History 
of Religions, Hume wrote : “ There is a universal tendency among mankind 
to conceive all beings like themselves. . . . The unknown causes which 
continually employ their thoughts, appearing always in the same aspect, 
are all apprehended to be of the same kind or species. Nor is it long before 
we ascribe to them thought and reason and passion, and sometimes even 
the limbs and figures of men." 

1 Chrysippus. See Gilbert Murray’s Four Stages of Greek Religion, 
p. 17. 

1 Indians and the Iranians are said to belong to the larger family of 
Indo-Europeans, with their subdivisions of Teutonic, Celtic, Slavonic, Italic, 
Hellenic, Armenian races. From a comparison of the beliefs and practices 
of these people scholars infer a sort of Indo-European religion. Animism 
and magic, ancestor worship and belief in immortality are said to be the 
main elements of the Indo-European religion,# Recent ethnologists, such as 
Ripley, seem to adopt a somewhat different classification of races. Some 



THE HYMNS OF THE RG-VEDA 


75 


ancient religions and philosophical ideas of India and 
Persia. Dr. Mills says : “ The A vesta is nearer the Veda 
than the Veda is to its own epic Sanskrit.” There is an 
underlying continuity of language. When the Aryans 
came to India through the Punjab they found the natives 
of India whom they called Dasyus opposing their free 
advance . 1 These Dasyus were of a dark complexion, 
eating beef and indulging in goblin worship. When the 
Aryans met them they desired to keep themselves aloof 
from them. It is this spirit of exclusiveness born of pride 
of race and superiority of culture that developed into the 
later caste spirit. The anxiety to keep their religion pure 
from contamination led the Aryans to collect together 
their own sacred literature. The word samhita, which 
means “collection,” suggests that the hymns of the 
Rg-Veda were collected at the period when the Aryans and 
the non-Aryans met on the soil of India. We shall begin 
our sketch of the Vedic gods with those Indo-Iranian ones 
held in common by the two sister races before their 
separation. 

The feeling of the incompleteness of this world, the 
weakness of man, the need felt for a higher spirit, a guide, 
a friend, a support on which man could rest, to whom he 
could appeal in distress, is natural to the sick heart of man. 
At that early age nothing could answer to this feeling for 
the infinite so well as the boundless and brilliant firma- 
ment of heaven. The sun and the moon and the stars 

identity the Aryan race with the Teutonic or the Nordic. We have nothing 
to do with these here. The history of Indian thought commences only 
when the Aryans of Central Asia separated themselves into two groups, 
the one making through Afghanistan to India and the other spreading over 
the territory called the Iran. 

1 The details of the wanderings of those who first called themselves 
Aryans cannot be decided with any definiteness from the now available 
data. The Vedic hymns reveal a later stage of social life when Sanskrit 
was a spoken language and the Aryan race was split up into many branches. 
Nor are we prepared to admit that the Dravidians were the aborigines of 
India. The Dravidians seem to have come to India at a much earlier date 
than the Aryans, and had their civilisation well established in India before 
the coming of the Aryans. The Dravidians, it is true, adopted the Aryan 
forms of life, but in their turn they influenced the Aryan civilisation. Th« 
numerous tribes who still inhabit mountainous regions difficult of access 
were perhaps the original inhabitants of India 



76 


INDIAN PHILOSOPHY 


may change, storms break and clouds roll away, but the 
sky abides for ever. Dyaus 1 * 3 * 5 is not merely an Indo- 
Iranian deity, but an Indo-European one. It survives in 
Greece as Zeus, in Italy as Jupiter (Heavenly Father), 
and among the Teutonic tribes as Tyr and Tyi. Deva 
meant originally bright, and later was applied to all the 
bright ones, the sun, the sky, the stars, the dawn, the 
day, etc. It became a general term connoting the common 
features of all shining ones. The earth also was soon 
deified. Heaven and Earth at the beginning had perhaps only 
the physical aspects of vastness, breadth, productiveness.* 
The attributes ascribed to the Earth are such as “ yielding 
honey,” “ full of milk.” But very early Heaven and Earth 
became endowed with human qualities such as “ not de- 
caying,” " father ” and “ mother.” Moral attributes such as 
beneficence, omniscience and righteousness were also added.3 
It may be that there has been steady advance from the phy- 
sical to the personal and from the personal to the divine. 
Earth and Heaven, the first objects of worship the world over, 
though probably in the beginning they were looked upon as 
independent beings, soon entered into a marriage alliance. The 
Earth was looked upon as the fruitful mother, impregnated 
by Heaven. In the Homeric hymns the Earth is addressed 
as “ Mother of Gods, the wife of the starry Heaven.” 4 
Earth and Heaven are the universal parents who give 
life to all creatures and grant them the means of subsist- 
ence. In the Rg-Veda they are generally addressed in 
the dual number as two beings forming but one concept, 
for all between, the sun, the dawn, the fire, the wind and 
the rain were their offspring. They are the parents of men 
and gods. 5 As the number of gods increased the question 
arose as to who made Heaven and Earth. “ He was 
indeed among the gods the cleverest workman, who 
produced the brilliant ones (Heaven and Earth) that 


1 D to shine. 

» i. ioo. 2 ; i. 187. 5 ; iv. 56. 3 ; vi. 70, 1-2. 

3 i. 159. 1 ; i. 160. 1 ; iv. 56. 2 ; vi. 70. 6. 

« See Max Muller: India ; What can it teach us? p. 156. 

5 i. 185. 4 ; i. 159. 1-2 ; i. 106. 3 ; iii. 3. 11 ; iv. 56. 2 ; vi. 17. 7 ; vii 

53 1-2 ; ix. 85. 12 ; x. 1. 7 ; x. 35. 3 ; x. 64. 14 ; x. 65. 8 ; x. xi. 9. 



THE HYMNS OF THE RG-VEDA 


77 


gladden all things ; he who measures the two bright 
ones by his wisdom and establishes them on everlasting 
supports.” 1 * This creative power is assigned to Agni, 3 * * 
Indra,3 or Soma.4 Other gods also come in for this 
honour. 5 

Varuna is the god of the sky. The name is derived 
from the root “ var,” to “ cover " or “ compass.” He is 
identical with the Greek Ouranos and the Ahuramazda of 
the Avesta. His physical origin is manifest. He is the 
coverer or the enfolder. He covers the whole starry 
expanse of heaven “ as with a robe, with all the creatures 
thereof and their dwellings.” 6 Mitra is his constant com- 
panion. Varuna and Mitra, when used together, express 
night and day, darkness and light. Varuna’s figure is 
steadily transformed and idealised till he becomes the 
most moral god of the Vedas. He watches over the world, 
punishes the evildoers and forgives the sins of those who 
implore his pardon. The sun is his eye, the sky is his 
garment and the storm is his breath.7 Rivers flow by his 
command 8 ; the sun shines, the star and the moon are in 
their courses for fear of him.9 By his law heaven and earth 
are held apart. He upholds the physical and the moral 
order. He is no capricious god, but a “ dlirtavrata,” one 
of fixed resolve. Other gods obey his orders. He is 
omniscient, and as such knows the flight of the birds in the 
sky, the path of the ships on the ocean and the course of 
the wind. Not a sparrow can fall without his knowledge. 
He is the supreme God, the God of gods, harsh to the 
guilty and gracious to the penitent. He conforms to the 
eternal law of the moral world which he has established. 
Yet in his mercy he is willing to forgive those who offend 
against him. " He is merciful even to him who has com- 
mitted sin.” 10 In almost all the hymns to Varuna we 
find prayers for the forgiveness of sin, filled with confes- 

1 R.V., i. 160. 4 ; see also iv. 56. 3. 

* i. 67. 3. 3 x. 89. 4. « ix. 101.15. 

S iii. 31. 12. 4 viii. 41. 7 vii. 87. 2. 

8 i. 24. 8 ; ii. 28. 4 ; vii. 87. 5. 

» i. 24. 10 ; i. 25. 6 ; i. 44. 14 ; ii. 14 ; ii. 28. 8 ; iii. 54. 18 ; viii. 25. 2, 

*• vii. 87. 7. 



78 INDIAN PHILOSOPHY 

sions of guilt and repentance , 1 which show that the Aryan 
poets had a sense of the burden of sin and prayer. 

The theism of the Vaisnavas and the Bhagavatas, 
with its emphasis on bhakti, is to be traced to the Vedic 
worship of Varuna, with its consciousness of sin and trust 
in divine forgiveness. Professor Macdonell says that 
“ Varuna’s character resembles that of the divine ruler in 
a monotheistic belief of an exalted type.” 2 

The law of which Varuna is the custodian is called the 
Rta. Rta literally means “ the course of things.” It 
stands for law in general and the immanence of justice. 
This conception must have been originally suggested by 
the regularity of the movements of sun, moon and stars, 
the alternations of day and of night, and of the seasons. 

1 The following hymn to Varuna translated by Muir into verse, vol. v. 
O.S.T., p. 64, though from the Atharva-Veda (iv. 16. 1-5), brings out the 
high conception of God cherished by the Vedic Aryans : 

" The mighty Lord on high, our deeds, as if at hand espies : 

The gods know all men do, though men would fain their deeds disguise. 
Whoever stands, whoever moves, or steals from place to place, 

Or hides him in his secret cell — the gods his movements trace. 
Wherever two together plot, and deem they are alone, 

King Varuna is there, a third, and all their schemes are known. 

This earth is his, to him belong those vast and boundless skies ; 

Both seas within him rest, and yet in that small pool he lies. 

Whoever far beyond the sky should think his way to wing. 

He could not there elude the grasp of Varuna the king. 

His spies descending from the skies glide all this world around. 

Their thousand eyes all-scanning sweep to earth’s remotest bound. 
Whate’er exists in heaven and earth, whate’er beyond the skies. 

Before the eyes of Varuna, the king, unfolded lies. 

The ceaseless winkings all he counts of every mortal’s eyes : 

He wields this universal frame, as gamester throws his dice. 

Those knotted nooses which thou fling’st, O God, the bad to snare, — 
All liars let them overtake, but all the truthful spare." 

Again: “ How can I get near to Varuna ? will he accept my offering with- 
out displeasure ) When shall I, with a quiet mind see him propitiated ? 

“ I ask, O Varuna, wishing to know this my sin ; I go to ask the wise, 
the sages, all tell me the same : Varuna it is who is angry with thee.” 

" Was it for an old sin, O Varuna, that thou wishest 10 destroy thy friend 
who always praises thee ? Tell me, thou unconquerable Lord, and I will 
quickly turn to thee with praise, freed from sin.” 

“ Absolve us from the sins of our fathers, and from those which we 
committed with our own bodies." 

" It is not our own doing, Varuna, it was a slip ; an intoxicating draught, 
passion, dice, thoughtlessness.” 

* Vedic Mythology, p. 3. 



79 


THE HYMNS OF THE RG-VEDA 

Rta denotes the order of the world. Everything that is 
ordered in the universe has Rta for its principle. It cor- 
responds to the universals of Plato. 1 The world of experi- 
ence is a shadow or reflection of the Rta, the permanent 
reality which remains unchanged in all the welter of muta- 
tion. The universal is prior to the particular, and so the 
Vedic seer thinks that Rta exists before the manifestation 
of all phenomena. The shifting series of the world are 
the varying expressions of the constant Rta. So Rta is 
called the father of all. “ The Maruts come from afar 
from the seat of the Rta.” 2 * * 5 Visnu is the embryo of the 
Rta.3 Heaven and earth are what they are by reason of 
the Rta. 4 The tendency towards the mystic conception of 
an unchanging reality shows its first signs here. The real 
is the unchanging law. What is, is an unstable show, an 
imperfect copy. The real is one without parts and changes, 
while the many shift and pass. Soon this cosmic order 
becomes the settled will of a supreme god, the law of 
morality and righteousness as well. Even the gods cannot 
transgress it. We see in the conception of Rta a develop- 
ment from the physical to the divine. Rta originally 
meant the “ established route of the world, of the sun, 
moon and stars, morning and evening, day and night.” 
Gradually it became the path of morality to be followed 
by man and the law of righteousness observed even by 
gods. “ The dawn follows the path of Rta, the right 
path ; as if she knew them before. She never oversteps 
the regions. The sun follows the path of Rta.” 5 The 
whole universe is founded on Rta and moves in it. 6 This 
conception of Rta reminds us of Wordsworth’s invocation 
to duty. 

Thou dost preserve the stars from wrong ; 

And the most ancient heavens, through thee, are fresh and strong. 

1 Hegel characterises the categories or universals of logic as " God 

before the creation of the world or any planet.” I owe this reference to 

Professor J. S. Mackenzie. The Chinese sage Lao Tsu recognises a cosmic 
order or the Tao, which serves as the foundation for his ethics, philosophy 
and religion. 

* iv. 2i 3. 3 i. 156. 3. 4 x. 121. 1. 

5 i. 24 8, Heraclitus says " Helios (the sun) will not overstep the bounds." 

• iv. 23 9. 



80 


INDIAN PHILOSOPHY 


What law is in the physical world, that virtue is in the 
moral world. The Greek conception of the moral life as a 
harmony or an ordered whole is suggested here. Varuna, 
who was first the keeper of the physical order, becomes 
the custodian of the moral order, Rtasya gopa and the 
punisher of sin. The prayer to the gods is in many cases 
for keeping us in the right path. “ 0 Indra, lead us on 
the path of Rta, on the right path over all evils.” 1 

So soon as the conception of Rta was recognised there 
was a change in the nature of gods. The world is no more 
a chaos representing the blind fury of chance elements, 
but is the working of a harmonious purpose. This faith 
gives us solace and security whenever unbelief tempts us 
and confidence in ourselves is shattered. Whatever might 
happen, we feel that there is a law of righteousness in the 
moral world answering to the beautiful order of nature. 
As sure as the sun rises to-morrow virtue will triumph. 
Rta can be trusted. 

Mitra is the companion of Varuna and is generally 
invoked along with him. He represents sometimes the 
sun and sometimes the light. He is also an all-seeing, 
truth-loving god. Mitra and Varuna are j oint -keepers of 
the Rta and forgivers of sin. Gradually, Mitra comes to 
be associated with the morning light and Varuna with the 
night-sky. Varuna and Mitra are called the Adityas, or 
the sons of Aditi, along with Aryaman and Bhaga. 

Surya is the sun. He has some ten hymns addressed 
to him. The worship of the sun is natural to the human 
mind. It is an essential part of the Greek religion. Plato 
idealised sun-worship in the Republic. To him the sun 
was the symbol of the Good. In Persia we have sun- 
worship. The sun, the author of all light and life in the 
world, has supernatural powers assigned to him. He is 
the life of " all that moveth and standeth.” He is all 
seeing, the spy of the world. He rouses men to perform 
their activities, dispels darkness and gives light. " Surya 
is rising, to pace both worlds, looking down on men, pro- 
tector of all that travel or stay, beholding right and 
wrong among men.” 1 Surya becomes the creator of the 
world and its governor. 

* x. 133. 6. • R.V., vii. 60. 



81 


THE HYMNS OF THE RG-VEDA 

Savitr, celebrated in eleven entire hymns, is also a 
solar deity. He is described as golden-eyed, golden-handed 
and golden-tongued. He is sometimes distinguished from 
the Sun, 1 though often identified with him. Savitr repre- 
sents not only the bright sun of the golden day, but also 
the invisible sun of night. He has a lofty moral side, 
being implored by the repentant sinner for the forgiveness 
of sin : “ Whatever offence we may have committed against 
the heavenly host, through feebleness of understanding, or 
through weakness or through pride or through human 
nature, O Savitr, take from us this sin.” 2 The Gayatri 
hymn is addressed to Surya in the form of Savitr : “ Let 
us meditate on that adorable splendour of Savitr ; may 
he enlighten our minds.” The oft-quoted hymn from the 
Yajur-Veda, “ 0 God Savitr, the Creator of All, remove 
the obstructions and grant the blessings,” is addressed to 
Savitr. 

Surya in the form of Visnu supports all the worlds. 3 
Visnu is the god of three strides. He covers the earth, 
heaven and the highest worlds visible to mortals. None 
can reach the limits of his greatness. “ We can from the 
earth know two of thy spaces, thou alone, O Visnu, 
knowest thine own highest abode.” 4 Visnu holds a sub- 
ordinate position in the Rg-Veda, though he has a great 
future before him. The basis of Vaisnavism is, however, 
found in the Rg-Veda, where Visnu is described as brhai- 
sanrah, great in body, or having the world for his body, 
pratyety dhavam, he who comes in response to the invitation 
of the devotees.5 He is said to have traversed thrice the 
earth spaces for the sake of man in distress. 6 

Pusan is another solar god. He is evidently a friend 
of man, being a pastoral god and the guardian of cattle. 
He is the god of wayfarers and husbandmen. 

Ruskin says : “ There is no solemnity so deep to a rightly 
thinking creature as that of the dawn.” The boundless 
dawn from which flash forth every morning light and life 
becomes the goddess Usas, the Greek Eos, the brilliant 

1 R.V., vii. 63. J iv. 54. 3. 3 i. 21. 154. 

♦ i. 22. 18 ; vii. 59. 1-2, 5 i. 155. 6, 6 Manave bddhildya, iv. 6. 



82 INDIAN PHILOSOPHY 

maid of morning loved by the Asvins, and the sun, but 
vanishing before the latter as he tries to embrace her with 
his golden rays. 

The Asvins are invoked in about fifty hymns and in 
parts of many others. 1 They are inseparable twins, the 
bright lords of brilliance and lustre, strong and agile and 
fleet as eagles. They are the children of Heaven, and the 
Dawn is their sister. It is supposed that the phenomenon 
of twilight is their material basis. That is why we have 
two Asvins corresponding to the dawn and the dusk. They 
gradually become the physicians of gods and men, wonder- 
workers, protectors of conjugal love and life and the 
deliverers of the oppressed from all kinds of suffering. 

We have already mentioned Aditi from whom the several 
gods called Adityas are born. Aditi literally means “ un- 
bound or unlimited.” It seems to be a name for the 
invisible, the infinite which surrounds us on all sides, and 
also stands for the endless expanse beyond the earth, the 
clouds and the sky. It is the immense substratum of all 
that is here and also beyond. “ Aditi is the sky, Aditi is 
the intermediate region, Aditi is father and mother and 
son, Aditi is all the gods and the five tribes, Aditi is what- 
ever has been born, Aditi is whatever shall be born.” * 
Here we have the anticipation of a universal all-embracing, 
all-producing nature itself, the immense potentiality or 
the prakrti of the Samkhya philosophy. It corresponds to 
Anaximander’s Infinite. 

An important phenomenon of nature raised to a deity 
is Fire. Agni 3 is second in importance only to Indra, 
being addressed in at least 200 hymns. The idea of Agni 
arose from the scorching sun, which by its heat kindled 
inflammable stuff. It came from the clouds as lightning. 
It has also its origin in flintstone.4 It comes from fire 
sticks. 5 Matarisvan, like Prometheus, is supposed to have 
brought fire back from the sky and entrusted it to the 
keeping of the Bhrgus. 6 The physical aspects are evident 
in the descriptions of Agni as possessing a tawny beard. 


• Asvins are literally horsemen. 

3 Latin Ignis. « ii. 12. 3. 

* The name of a clan. 


* R.V., i. 89. 

5 Sanskrit aragis. 



THE HYMNS OF THE RG-YEDA 


83 


sharp jaws and burning teeth. Wood or ghee is his food. 
He shines like the sun dispelling the darkness of night. 
His path is black when he invades the forests and his 
voice is like the thunder of heaven. He is dhumaketu, 
having smoke for his banner. " O Agni, accept this log 
which I offer to thee, blaze up brightly and send up thy 
sacred smoke, touch the topmost heavens with thy mane 
and mix with the beams of the sun.” 1 Fire is thus seen 
to dwell not only on earth in the hearth and the altar but 
also in the sky and the atmosphere, as the sun and the 
dawn and as lightning in the clouds. He soon becomes a 
supreme god, stretching out heaven and earth. As the 
concept grew more and more abstract it also became more 
and more sublime. He becomes the mediator between 
gods and men, the helper of all. “ O Agni, bring hither 
Varuna to our offering. Bring Indra from the skies, the 
Maruts from the air.” * “I hold Agni to be my father. I 
hold him to be my kinsman, my brother and also my 
friend.” 3 

Soma, the god of inspiration, the giver of immortal 
life, is analogous to the Haoma of the Avesta and Dionysos 
of Greece, the god of the wine and the grape. All these 
are the cults of the intoxicants. Miserable man requires 
something or other to drown his sorrows in. When he 
takes hold of an intoxicating drink for the first time, a 
thrill of delight possesses him. He is mad, no doubt, but 
he thinks it is a divine madness. What we call spiritual 
vision, sudden illumination, deeper insight, larger charity 
and wider understanding — all these are the accompani- 
ments of an inspired state of the soul. No wonder the 
drink that elevates the spirit becomes divine. Whitney 
observes : “ The simple-minded Aryan people, whose 

whole religion was a worship of the wonderful powers and 
phenomena of nature, had no sooner perceived that the 
liquid had power to elevate the spirits and produce a 
temporary frenzy under the influence of which the individual 
was prompted to and capable of deeds beyond his natural 
powers, than they found in it something divine ; it was to 
their apprehension a god, endowing those into whom it 
» R.V., ii. 6. * R.V., x. 70. u. 1 R.V., x. 7. 3. 



84 INDIAN PHILOSOPHY 

entered with god-] ike powers ; the plant which afforded it 
became to them the king of plants, the process of preparing 
was a holy sacrifice ; the instruments used therefor were 
sacred. The high antiquity of this cultus is attested by 
the references to it found occurring in the Persian Avesta ; 
it seems, however, to have received a new impulse on 
Indian territory,” 1 Soma is not completely personalised. 
The plant and the juice are so vividly present to the poet’s 
mind that he cannot easily deify them. The hymns 
addressed to Soma were intended to be sung while the 
juice was being pressed out of the plant. “ O Soma, poured 
out for Indra to drink, flow on purely in a most sweet and 
exhilarating current.” 2 In viii. 48. 3 the worshipper 
exclaims : “ We have drunk the Soma, we have become 
immortal, we have entered into light, we have known the 
gods.” This confusion of spiritual ecstasy with physical 
intoxication is not peculiar to the Vedic age. William 
James tells us that the drunken consciousness is a bit of 
the mystic consciousness. It is believed that we can attain 
the divine through physical intoxication. Soma gradually 
acquires medicinal powers, helping the blind to see and 
the lame to walk .3 The following beautiful hymn to Soma 
points out how important a place he occupies in the 
affections of the Vedic Aryans. 

Where there is eternal light, in the world, where the sun is placed, 
in that immortal, imperishable world, place me, O Soma. 
Where the son of Vivasvat reigns as King, where the secret place 
of heaven is, where these mighty waters are, make me immortal. 
Where life is free, in the third heaven of heavens, where the worlds 
are radiant, there mr.ke me immortal. 

Where wishes and desires are, where the bowl of the bright Soma 
is, where there is food an ] rejoicing, there make me immortal. 
Where there is happiness and delight, where joy and pleasure reside, 
where the desires of our desire are attained, there make me 
immortal. < 

In the hymn to Soma just quoted there is a reference 
to the son of Vivasvat, who is the Yama of the Rg-Veda 

1 J.A.O S., iii. 292. J ix. i. 3 vii. 68. 2, and x. 25. 11 

< S.B E., Vedic Hymns, part i. See Gilbert Murray’s translation of 
the Bacckce of Euripides, p. 20. 



THE HYMNS OF THE RG-VEDA 


85 


answering to the Yima, the son of Vivanhvant of the 
Avesta. There are three hymns addressed to Yama. He 
is the chief of the dead, not so much a god as a ruler of 
the dead. He was the first of mortals to die and find his 
way to the other world, the first to tread the path of the 
fathers. 1 Later he acts as the host receiving new-comers. 
He is the king of that kingdom, for he has the longest 
experience of it. He is sometimes invoked as the god of 
the setting sun. 2 * * In the Brahmanas Yama becomes the 
judge and chastiser of men. But in the Rg-Veda he is yet 
only their king. Yama illustrates the truth of the remark 
which Lucian puts into the mouth of Heraclitus : “ What are 
men ? Mortal gods. What are gods ? Immortal men.” 

Parjanya was the Aryan sky god. He seems to have 
become Indra after the Aryans entered India, for Indra is 
unknown to the other members of the Aryan family. In 
the Vedas Parjanya is another name for the sky. "The 
Earth is the mother and I am the son of the Earth, 
Parjanya is the father. May he help us.” 3 In the Atharva- 
Veda Earth is called the wife of Parjanya.r Parjanya is 
the god of cloud and rain. 5 He rules as god over the whole 
world ; all creatures rest in him ; he is the life of all that 
moves and rests. 6 There are also passages where the word 
Parjanya is used for cloud or rain. 7 Max Muller is of 
opinion that Parjanya is identical with the Lithuanian god 
of thunder called Perkunas. 8 

Of all the phenomena of nature which arouse the feel- 
ing of awe and terror, nothing can challenge comparison 
with thunder storms. “ Yes, when I send thunder and 
lightning,” says Indra, “ then you believe in me.” Judging 
from the hymns addressed to him, Indra is the most 
popular god of the Vedas. When the Aryans entered 
India they found that, as at present, their prosperity was a 
mere gamble in rain. The rain god naturally becomes the 
national god of the Indo-Aryans. Indra is the god of 
the atmospheric phenomena, of the blue sky. He is the 

1 Pitryana, x. 2. 7. * x. 14. 3 A.V., xii. 1. 12. 

4 xii. 1. 42. 5 R.V., v. S3. 6 R.V., vH. 101. 6. 

7 See R.V., i. 164. 5 ; vii. 61. 

• India ; What can it leach us I Lect. VI. 



86 


INDIAN PHILOSOPHY 


Indian Zeus. His naturalistic origin is clear. He is born 
of waters and the cloud. He wields the thunder-bolt, and 
conquers darkness. He brings us light and life, gives us 
vigour and freshness. Heaven bows before him and the 
earth trembles at his approach. Gradually Indra's con- 
nexion with the sky and the thunder-storms is forgotten. 
He becomes the divine spirit, the ruler of all the world 
and all the creatures, who sees and hear* everything, and 
inspires men with their best thoughts and impulses. 1 The 
god of the thunder-storm vanquishing the demons of drought, 
and darkness becomes the victorious god of battles of the 
Aryans in their struggles with the natives. The times 
were of great activity, and the people were engaged in an 
adventure of conquest and domination. He will have 
nothing to do with the native peoples of alien faiths. 
“ The hero- god who as soon as born shielded the gods, 
before whose might the two worlds shook — that, ye people, 
is Indra ; who made fast the earth and the heaving 
mountains, measured the space of air, upheld the heaven— 
that, ye people, is Indra ; who slew the serpent and freed 
the seven streams, rescued the cows, the pounder in battle 
— that, ye people, is Indra ; the dread god of whom ye 
doubting ask, where is he, and sneer, he is not, he who 
sweeps away the enemies’ possessions, have faith in him — 
that, ye people, is Indra ; in whose might stand horses, 
cattle and armed hosts, to whom both lines of battle call — 
that, ye people, is Indra ; without whose aid men never 
conquer, whose arrow little thought of slays the wicked — 
that, ye people, is Indra.” 2 This champion-god acquires 
the highest divine attributes, rules over the sky, the earth, 
the waters and the mountains, 3 and gradually displaces 
Varuna from his supreme position in the Vedic pantheon. 
Varuna, the majestic, the just and the serene, the con- 
stant in purpose, he is not fit for the struggling, conquering, 
active times on which the Aryans have entered. So we 
hear the echo of this great revolution in the Vedic world 
in some hymns.4 

1 viii. 37. 3; viii. 78. 5. * K.V., ii. 12. 3 x. 89. 10. 

4 (Varuna speaks) : " I am the king ; mine is the lordship. All the 
gods are subject to me, the universal life-giver, and follow Varuija's ordi- 



87 


THE HYMNS OF THE RG-VEDA 

Indra had also to battle with other gods worshipped 
by the different tribes settled in India. There were wor 
shippers of waters, 1 the Asvattha tree. 2 Many of the 
demons with whom Indra fought were the tribal gods such 
as Vrtra, the serpent.3 Another foe of Indra, in the 
period of the Rg-Veda, was Krsna, the deified hero of a 
tribe called the Krsnas. The verse reads : " The fleet 
Krsna lived on the banks of the Amsumatl (Jumna) river 
with ten thousand troops. Indra of his own wisdom 
became cognisant of this loud-yelling chief. He destroyed 
the marauding host for our benefit.” 4 This is the inter- 
pretation suggested by Sayana, and the story has some 
interest in connection with the Krsna cult. The later 
Puranas speak of the opposition between Indra and 
Krsna. It may be that Krsna is the god of the 
pastoral tribe which was conquered by Indra in the 
Rg-Veda period, though at the time of the Bhagavadgita 
he recovered much lost ground and got reinforced by 
becoming identified with the Vasudeva of the Bhaga- 
vatas and the Visnu of the Vaisnavas. It is this 
miscellaneous origin and history that make him the 
author of the Bhagavadgita, the personation of the 


nances. I rule in men’s highest sanctuary — I am king Varuna — I, O Indra, 
am Varuna, and mine are the two wide, deep, blessed worlds. A wise maker, 
I created all the beings ; Heaven and earth are by me preserved. I made 
the flowing waters to swell. I established in their sacred seat the heavens. 
T, the holy Aditya, spread out the triparite universe " (heaven, earth and 
atmosphere). 

(Indra speaks) : " I am invoked by the steed-possessing men when 
pressed hard in battle ; I am the mighty one who stirs up the fight and whirls 
up the dust, in my overwhelming strength. All that have I done, nor can 
the might of all the gods restrain me, the unconquered ; when I am exhila- 
rated by libations and prayers, then quake both boundless worlds.” 

The Rsi speaks : “ That thou didst all these things, all beings know ; 
and now thou hast proclaimed it to Varuna, O Ruler ! Thee Indra men 
praise as the slayer of Vrtra ; it was thou who didst let loose the imprisoned 
waters " (iv. 42). 

“ I now say farewell, to the father, the Asura ; I go from him to whom 
no sacrifices are offered, to him to whom men sacrifice — in choosing Indra, I 
give up the father though I have lived with him many years in friendship. 
Agni, Varuna and Soma must give way ; the power goes to another. I 
see it come ” (x. 124). 

1 x. 9. 1 - 3 - 

1 R.V., vi. 33. 2 ; vi. 29. Qw 


• R.V., i. 135. 8. 
« viii. 85. 13-15. 



88 INDIAN PHILOSOPHY 

Absolute, as well as the cowherd playing the flute on 
the banks of the Jumna. 1 

By the side of Indra are several minor deities repre- 
senting other atmospheric phenomena, Vata or Vayu, the 
wind, the Maruts, the terrible storm-gods, and Rudra the 
howler. Of wind a poet says : “ Where was he born and 
whence did he spring, the life of the gods and the germ 
of the world ? That god moves about, where he listeth, 
his voices are heard, but he is not to be seen.” 2 Vata is 
an Indo-Iranian god. The Maruts are the deifications of 
the great storms so common in India, “ when the air is 
darkened by dust and clouds, when in a moment the trees 
are stripped of their foliage, their branches shivered, their 
stems snapped, when the earth seems to reel and the 
mountains shake and the rivers are lashed into foam and 
fury.” 3 Maruts are powerful and destructive usually, but 
sometimes they are also kind and beneficent. They lash 
the world from end to end, or clear the air and bring the 
rain. 4 They are the comrades of Indra and sons of Dyaus. 
Indra is sometimes called the eldest of the Maruts. On 
account of their fierce aspects they are considered to be 
the sons of Rudra the militant God.5 Rudra has a very 
subordinate position in the Rg-Veda, being celebrated 
only in three entire hymns. He holds a thunder-bolt in 
his arms and discharges lightning shafts from the skies. 
Later he becomes Siva the benignant, with a whole tradi- 
tion developed round him. 6 

We also come across certain goddesses similarly de- 
veloped. Usas and Aditi are goddesses. The river Sindhu 

1 Later on, the Krsna cult became superior to the lower forms of worship 
of snakes and serpents and to the Vedic worship of Indra. Sister Nivedita 
writes : “ Krsna conquers the snake Kalfya and leaves his own footprint 
on his head. Here is the same struggle that we can trace in the personality 
of Ava as Nagesvara. between the new devotional faith and the old tradi- 
tional worship of snakes and serpents. He persuades the shepherds to 
abandon the sacrifice to Indra. Here he directly overrides the older Vedic 
gods, who, as in some parts of the Himalayas to-day, seem to know nothing 
of the interposition of Brahma " ( Footfalls of Indian History, p. 212). 

1 x. 168 34. 

3 Max Muller: India ; What can it teach us? p. 180. 

« R.V., i. 37. ij ; i 64. 6; i. 86. 10; ii. 34. 12. 

5 i. 64. 2. 

6 R.V., vii. 46. 3; i. 114. 10; i. 114. 1. 



89 


TPIE HYMNS OF THE RG-VEDA 

is celebrated as a goddess in one hymn, 1 and Sarasvati, 
first the name of a river, gradually becomes the goddess 
of learning.- Vak is the goddess of speech. AranyanI is 
the goddess of the forest. 3 The later £akta systems utilise 
the goddesses of the Rg-Veda. The Vedic Aryan prayed 
to the Sakti or the energy of God, as he meditated on the 
adorable divine light that burnt up all dross : “ Come 

thou, O goddess, that granteth our prayers, Thou art the 
unperishing, the equal of Brahman.” 4 

When thought advanced from the material to the 
spiritual, from the physical to the personal, it was easy 
to conceive of abstract deities. Most of such deities occur 
in the last book of the Rg-Veda, thus indicating then 
relatively late origin. We have Manyu,5 Sraddha, 6 etc. 
Certain qualities associated with the true conception of 
god are deified. Tvastr, sometimes identified with Savitr,7 
is “ the maker ” or the constructor of the world. He 
forged Indra’s thunder-bolt, sharpened the axe of Brahma- 
naspati, made the cups out of which the gods drink Soma, 
and gave shape to all living things. Brahmanaspati is a 
very late god, belonging to the period when sacrifices 
began to come into vogue. Originally the lord of prayer, 
he soon became the god of sacrifices. We see in him the 
transition between the spirit of the pure Vedic religion 
and the later Brahmanism. 8 


VI 

Monotheistic Tendencies 

As we shall see in our discussion of the Atharva-Veda, 
mythical conceptions from beyond the limits of the Aryan 
world belonging to a different order of thought entered 
into the Vedic pantheon. All this crowding of gods and 
goddesses proved a weariness to the intellect. So a tendency 

1 x, 75, 2 , 4, 6. * vi. 61. 3 x. 146. 

4 Ayatu varada devj, aksaratn brahmasammitarn. Tait. Ar., x. 34. 5 2 * 

5 Wrath, x. 83. 4 6 Faith x. 151. 7 di. 55 - 19 * 

8 Roth remarks 1 ** All the gods whose names are compounded with 
jrati (lord of) must be reckoned among the more recent. They were the 
products of reflection/' This is, however, incorrect as a general statement. 
Cf. Vasto§pati. I owe this information to Professor Keith. 



90 


INDIAN PHILOSOPHY 


showed itself very early to identify one god with another 
or throw all the gods together. The attempts at classifi- 
cation reduced the gods to the three spheres of the earth, 
the air and the sky. Sometimes these gods are said to be 
333, or other combinations of three in number. 1 The gods 
are also invoked in pairs when they fulfil identical func- 
tions. They are sometimes thrown together in one large 
concept of a Visve devah, or pantheon. This tendency at 
systematisation had its natural end in monotheism, which 
is simpler and more logical than the anarchy of a crowd 
of gods and goddesses thwarting each other. 

Monotheism is inevitable with any true conception of 
God. The Supreme can only be one. We cannot have 
two supreme and unlimited beings. Everywhere the ques- 
tion was asked whether a god was himself the creation of 
another. A created god is no God at all. With the grow- 
ing insight into the workings of the world and the nature 
of godhead the many gods tended to melt into one. The 
perception of unity realised in the idea of Rta worked 
in support of monotheism. If the varied phenomena of 
nature demand many gods, should not the unity of nature 
require a single god who embraces all things that are ? 
Trust in natural law means faith in one God. The advance 
of this conception implies the paralysis of superstition. 
An orderly system of nature has no room for miraculous 
interferences in which alone superstition and confused 
thought find the signs of polytheism. In the worship of 
Varuna we have the nearest approach to monotheism. 
Attributes moral and spiritual, such as justice, beneficence, 
righteousness, and even pity were ascribed to him. There 
has been a growing emphasis on the higher and more 
idealistic side to the suppression or comparative neglect of 
the gross or material side. Varuna is the god to whom 
man and nature, this world and the other all belong. He 
cares not only for external conduct but also for inner 
purity of life. The implicit demand of the religious con- 
sciousness for one supreme God made itself manifest in 
what is characterised as the henotheism of the Vedas. It 
is, according to Max Muller, who coined the term, the 
■ See R.V.. iii. 9. 9. 



THE HYMNS OF THE RG-VEDA 


91 


worshipping of each divinity in turn, as if it were the greatest 
and even the only god. But the whole position is a logical 
contradiction, where the heart showed the right path of 
progress and belief contradicted it. We cannot have a 
plurality of gods, for religious consciousness is against it. 
Henotheism is an unconscious groping towards monotheism. 
The weak mind of man is yet seeking fcr its object. The 
Vedic Aryan felt keenly the mystery of the ultimate and 
the inadequacy of the prevailing conceptions. The gods 
worshipped as supreme stand side by side, though for the 
moment only one holds the highest position. The one 
god is not the denial of the other gods. Even minor gods 
sometimes assume the highest rank. It all depends upon 
the devotion of the poet and the special object he has in 
view. “ Varuna is the heaven, Varuna the earth, Varuna 
the air, Varuna is the universe and all besides.” Some- 
times Agni is all the gods. Sometimes Indra is greater 
than all gods. For the moment each god seems to become 
a composite photograph of all others. Self-surrender of 
man to God, the central fact of religious experience, is 
possible only with one God. Thus henotheism seems to be 
the result of the logic of religion. It is not, as Bloomfield 
suggests, “ polytheism grown cold in service, and unnice 
in its distinctions, leading to an opportunist monotheism, in 
which every god takes hold of the sceptre and none keeps it .” 1 

When each god is looked upon as the creator and 
granted the attributes of Visvakarman, maker of the world, 
Prajapati, lord of creatures, it is easy to drop the personal 
peculiarities and make a god of the common functions, 
especially when the several gods are only cloudy and con- 
fused concepts and not real persons. 

The gradual idealisation of the conception of God as 
revealed in the cult of Varuna, the logic of religion which 
tended to make the gods flow into one another, the heno- 
theism which had its face set in the direction of mono- 
theism, the conception of Rta or the unity of nature, and 
the systematising impulse of the human mind — all helped 
towards the displacement of a polytheistic anthropomor- 
phism by a spiritual monotheism. The Vedic seers at 
* The Religion of the Veda, p. 199- 

4 


VOL. I 



92 


INDIAN PHILOSOPHY 


this period were interested in discovering a single creative 
cause of the universe, itself uncreated and imperishable. 
The only logical way of establishing such a monotheism 
was by subordinating the gods under one higher being, or 
controlling spirit, which could regulate the workings of 
the lower gods. This process satisfied the craving for one 
god and yet allowed them to keep up the continuity with 
the past. Indian thought, however daring and sincere, 
was never hard and rude. It did not usually care to 
become unpopular, and so generally made compromises ; but 
pitiless logic, which is such a jealous master, had its 
vengeance, with the result that to-day Hinduism, on account 
of its accommodating spirit, has come to mean a hetero- 
geneous mass of philosophies, religions, mythologies and 
magics. The many gods were looked upon as the different 
embodiments of the universal spirit. They were ruling in 
their own respective spheres under the suzerainty of the 
supreme. Their powers were delegated and their lordship 
was only a viceroyalty, but not a sovereignty. The cap- 
ricious gods of a confused nature-worship became the cosmic 
energies whose actions were regulated in a harmonious 
system. Even Indra and Varuna become departmental 
deities. The highest position in the later part of the Rg-Veda 
is granted to Visvakarman. 1 He is the all-seeing god who 
has on every side eyes, faces, arms, feet, who produces heaven 
and earth through the exercise of his arms and wings, who 
knows all the worlds, but is beyond the comprehension of 
mortals. Brhaspati has also his claims for the supreme 
rank. 2 In many places it is Prajapati, the lord of creatures.3 
Hiranyagarbha, the golden god, occurs as the name of the 
Supreme, described as the one Lord of all that exists.4 

VII 

Monotheism versus Monism 

That even in the days of the Vedic hymns we have not 
merely wild imagination and fancy but also earnest thought, 

1 See x. 81. 82. 1 See x. 72. 

3 See x. 85. 43 ; x. 189. 4 ; x. 184. 4 ; Satapatha Brah., vi. 6. 8 

1-14 ; x. 1. 3. 1. « x. 121. 



THE HYMNS OF THE RG-VEDA 


93 


and inquiry, comes out from the fact that we find the 
questioning mood asserting itself very often. The necessity 
to postulate a number of gods is due to the impulse of 
mind which seeks to understand things instead of accepting 
facts as they are given to it. “ Where is the sun by night ? ” 
“ Where go the stars by day ? ” “ Why does the sun 
not fall down ? ” “ Of the two, night and day, which is 
the earlier, which the later ? ” “ Whence comes the wind, 

and whither goes it ? ” 1 Such are the questions and the 
feelings of awe and wonder which constitute the birthplace 
of all science and philosophy. We have seen also the 
instinctive groping for know'ledge revealing itself in all 
forms and fancies. Many gods were asserted. The long- 
ing of the human heart could not be satisfied with a 
pluralistic pantheon. The doubt arose as to which god 
was the real one. Kasmai devaya havisa vidhema, “ to 
what god shall we offer our oblation ? ” a The humble 
origin of the gods was quite patent. The new gods grew 
on Indian soil, and some were borrowed from the native 
races. A prayer to make us faithful 3 is not possible in a 
time of unshaken faith. Scepticism was in the air. Indra’s 
existence and supremacy were questioned. 4 The nastika or 
the denying spirit was busy at work dismissing the whole 
as a tissue of falsehood. Hymns were addressed to unknown 
gods. We reach the “ twilight of the gods.” in which 
they are slowly passing away. In the Upanisads the 
twilight changed into night and the very gods disappeared 
but for the dreamers of the past. Even the single great 
Being of the monotheistic period did not escape criticism. 
The mind of man is not satisfied with an anthropomorphic 
deity. If we say there is one great god under whom the 
others are, the question is not left unasked. “ Who has 
seen the firstborn, when he that had no bones bore him 
that has bones ? Where is the life, the blood, the self of 
the universe ? Who went to ask of any who knew ? ”5 It 
is the fundamental problem of philosophy. What is the 
life or essence of the universe ? Mere dogma will not do. 
We must feel or experience the spiritual reality. The 

* R.V., i. 24. 185. 2 x. 121. 

« x. 86. 1 ; vii. 100-3 ; ii. 12. 5. 


3 x. 151. 

3 R.V., 1 4. 164. 



94 INDIAN PHILOSOPHY 

question therefore is, “ Who has seen the firstborn ? ” 1 
The seeking minds did not so much care for personal com- 
fort and happiness as for absolute truth. Whether you 
look upon God with the savage as an angry and offended 
man or with the civilised as a merciful and compassionate 
being, the judge of all the earth, the author and controller 
of the world, it is a weak conception that cannot endure 
criticism. The anthropomorphic ideas must vanish. They 
give us substitutes for God, but not the true living God. 
We must believe in God, the centre of life, and not His 
shadow as reflected in men’s minds. God is the inex- 
haustible light surrounding us on all sides. Prano Virat 
(“Life is immense”). It includes thoughts no less than 
things. The same reveals itself under different aspects. 
It is one, uniform, eternal, necessary, infinite and all- 
powerful. From it all flows out. To it all returns. What- 
ever the emotional value of a personal God may be, truth 
sets up a different standard and requires a different object 
of worship. However cold and remote, awful and displeas- 
ing it may seem to be, it does not cease to be the truth. 
Monotheism, to which a large part of humanity even to-day 
clings, failed to satisfy the later Vedic thinkers. 

They applied to the central principle the neuter term 
Sat, to show that it is above sex. They were convinced 
that there was something real of which Agni, Indra, Varuna, 
etc., were only the forms or names. That something was, 
not many, but one, impersonal, ruling “ over all that is 
unmoving and that moves, that walks or flies, being 
differently born.”* “The real is one, the learned call it 
by various names, Agni, Yama and Matarisvan.” 3 

The starry heavens and the broad earth, the sea and 
the everlasting hills. 

Were all the workings of one mind, the features 
Of the same face, blossoms upon one tree ; 

Characters of the great apocalypse, 

The types and symbols of eternity. 

The first and the last and midst and without end. 4 

* Ko dadarsa prathama jayamanam ? > iii. 54. 8. 

3 Ekaih sad vipra. bahudha vadanti 

Agnim yamam matarisvanam ahulj (i. 164. 46). 

• Wordsworth, Prelude 6. 



95 


THE HYMNS OF THE RG-VEDA 

This one is the soul of the world, the reason immanent 
in the universe, the source of all nature, the eternal energy. 
It is neither the heaven nor the earth, neither sunshine nor 
storm, but another essence, perhaps the Rta substantiated, 
the Aditi spiritualised, the one breathing breathless. 1 We 
cannot see it, we cannot adequately describe it. With a 
touching sincerity the poet concludes : “ We never will 
behold him who gave birth to these things.” “ As a fool, 
ignorant in my own mind, I ask for the hidden places of 
the gods — not having discovered I ask the sages who may 
have discovered, not knowing in order to know.” 2 It is 
the supreme reality which lives in all things and moves 
them all, the real one that blushes in the rose, breaks into 
beauty in the clouds, shows its strength in the storms and 
sets the stars in the sky. Here then we have the intuition 
of the true God, who of all the gods is the only God, 
wonderful any day, but surpassingly wonderful because 
it was at such an early hour in the morning of mind’s 
history that the true vision was seen. In the presence of 
this one reality, the distinction between the Aryan and 
the Dravidian, the Jew and the heathen, the Hindu and 
the Muslim, the pagan and the Christian, all fade away. 
We have here a momentary vision of an ideal where of all 
earthly religions are but shadows pointing to the perfect 
day. The one is called by many names. “ Priests and 
poets with words make into many the hidden reality which 
is but one.” 3 Man is bound to form very imperfect ideas 
of this vast reality. The desires of his soul seem to be 
well satisfied with inadequate ideas, ” the idols which we 
here adore.” No two idols can be exactly the same, since 
no two men have exactly the same ideas. It is stupidity 
to quarrel about the symbols by which we attempt to 
express the real. The one God is called differently accord- 
ing to the different spheres in which he works or the tastes 
of the seeking souls. This is not to be viewed as any 
narrow accommodation to popular religion. It is a revela- 
tion of a profound philosophic truth. To Israel the same 

1 x. 129. 2. * R.V., x. 121 ; x. 82. 7; i. 167. 5-6. 

s x. I 14; see also the Yajur-Yeda, xxx. 2. 4. See Yaska's Nirukta, 
vii. 5. 



96 


INDIAN PHILOSOPHY 


revelation came : " The Lord, thy God, is One.” Plutarch 
says : “ There is One Sun and One sky over all nations 
and one Deity under many names.” 

O ! God, most glorious, called by many a name. 

Nature’s Great King, through endless years the same ; 
Omnipotence, who by thy just decree 
Controllest all, hail, Zeus, for unto thee 
Behoves thy creatures in all lands to call. 1 

Of this monistic theory of the Rg-Veda Deussen writes : 
“ The Hindus arrive at this monism by a method essen- 
tially different from that of other countries. Monotheism 
was attained in Egypt by a mechanical identification of 
the various local gods, in Palestine by proscription of other 
gods and violent persecution of their worshippers for the 
benefit of their national god Jehovah. In India they 
reached monism, though not monotheism on a more philo- 
sophical path, seeing through the veil of the manifold the 
unity which underlies it.” * Max Muller says : “ What- 
ever is the age when the collection of our Rg-Veda Samhita 
was finished, it was before that age that the conviction 
had been formed that there is but One, One Being, neither 
male nor female, a Being raised high above all the condi- 
tions and limitations of personality and of human nature, 
and nevertheless the Being that was really meant by all 
such names as Indra, Agni, Matarisvan, nay, even by the 
name of Prajapati, Lord of creatures. In fact, the Vedic 
poets had arrived at a conception of the godhead which 
was reached once more by some of the Christian philoso- 
phers at Alexandria, but which even at present is beyond 
the reach of many who call themselves Christians.” 3 

In some of the advanced hymns of the Rg-Veda the 
Supreme is indifferently called He or It. The apparent 
vacillation between monotheism and monism, a striking 
feature of Eastern as well of Western philosophy, revealed 
itself here for the first time in the history of thought. The 
same formless, impersonal, pure and passionless being of 

1 The Hymn of Cleanthes. 

« Outlines of Indian Philosophy, p. 13. 

I S.S., pp. 51, 52. 



THE HYMNS OF THE RG-VEDA 


9 ? 


philosophy is worshipped by the warm full-blooded heart 
of the emotional man as a tender and benevolent deity. 
This is inevitable. Religious consciousness generally takes 
the form of a dialogue, a communion of two wills, finite 
and infinite. There is a tendency to make of God an in- 
finite person over against the finite man. But this con- 
ception of God as one among many is not the highest truth 
of philosophy. Except for a few excessively logical people 
who wish to push their principles to their extreme conclu- 
sions, there cannot be religion without a personal God. 
Even the philosopher when asked to define the highest 
reality cannot but employ terms which reduce it to the 
lower level. Man knows that his limited powers cannot 
compass the transcendent vastness of the Universal Spirit. 
Yet he is obliged to describe the Eternal in his own small 
way. Bound down by his limitations he necessarily frames 
inadequate pictures of the vast, sublime, inscrutable source 
and energy of all things. He creates idols for his own 
satisfaction. Personality is a limitation, and yet only a 
personal God can be worshipped. Personality implies the 
distinction of self and not-self, and hence is inapplicable to 
the Being who includes and embraces all that is. The 
personal God is a symbol, though the highest symbol of 
the true living God. The formless is given a form, the 
impersonal is made personal ; the omnipresent is fixed to 
a local habitation ; the eternal is given a temporal setting. 
The moment we reduce the Absolute to an object of wor- 
ship, it becomes something less than the Absolute. To 
have a practical relationship with finite will, God must be 
less than the Absolute, but if He is less than the Absolute, 
then He cannot be the object of worship in any effective 
religion. If God is perfect, religion is impossible ; if God 
is imperfect, religion is ineffective. We cannot have with 
a finite limited God the joy of peace, the assurance of 
victory and the confidence in the ultimate destiny of the 
universe. True religion requires the Absolute. Hence to 
meet the demands of both popular religion and philosophy, 
the Absolute Spirit is indiscriminately called He or It. It 
is so in the Upanisads. It is so in the Bhagavadgita and 
the Vedanta Sutras. We need not put this down to a 



98 INDIAN PHILOSOPHY 

conscious compromise of theistic and monistic elements or 
any elusiveness of thought. The monistic conception is 
also capable of developing the highest religious spirit. 
Only prayer to God is replaced by contemplation of the 
Supreme Spirit that rules the world, the love that thrills 
it in an unerring but yet lavish way. The sympathy 
between the mind of the part and that of the whole is 
productive of the highest religious emotion. Such an 
ideal love of God and meditation on the plenitude of 
beauty and goodness flood the mind with the cosmic emo- 
tion. It is true that such a religion seems to the man 
who has not reached it and felt its power too cold or too 
intellectual, yet no other religion can be philosophically 
justified. 

All forms of religion which have appeared on earth 
assume the fundamental need of the human heart. Man 
longs for a power above him on which he could depend. 
One that is greater than himself whom he could worship. 
The gods of the several stages of the Vedic religion are the 
reflections of the growing wants and needs, the mental 
gropings and the heart-searchings of man. Sometimes he 
would want gods who would hear his prayers and accept 
his sacrifices, and we have gods answering to this prescrip- 
tion. We have naturalistic gods, anthropomorphic gods, but 
none of them answered to the highest conception, however 
much one might try to justify them to the mind of man 
by saying that they were the varying expressions of the 
one Supreme. The scattered rays dispersed among the 
crowd of deities are collected together in the intolerable 
splendour of the One nameless God who alone could satisfy 
the restless craving of the human heart and the sceptic 
mind. The Vedic progress did not stop until it reached 
this ultimate reality. The growth of religious thought as 
embodied in the hymns may be brought out by the men- 
tion of the typical gods : (i) Dyaus, indicative of the 

first state of nature worship ; (2) Varuna, the highly 

moral god of a later day ; (3) Indra, . the selfish god of 

the age of conquest and domination ; (4) Prajapati, the 

god of the monotheists ; and (5) Brahman, the perfection 
of all these four lower stages. This progression is as much 



THE HYMNS OF THE RG-VEDA 99 

chronological as logical. Only in the Vedic hymns we 
find them all set down side by side without any concep- 
tion of logical arrangement or chronological succession. 
Sometimes the same hymn has suggestions of them all. It 
only shows that when the text of the Rg-Veda came to 
be written all these stages of thought had already been 
passed, and people were clinging to some or all of them 
without any consciousness of their contradiction. 


VIII 

Cosmology 

The Vedic thinkers were not unmindful of the philoso- 
phical problems of the origin and nature of the world. In 
their search for the first ground of all changing things, they, 
like the ancient Greeks, looked upon water, air, etc., as 
the ultimate elements out of which the variety of the world 
is composed. Water is said to develop into the world 
through the force of time, samvatsara or year, desire or 
kama, intelligence or purusa, warmth or tapas. 1 Some- 
times water itself is derived from night or chaos, tamas, or 
air. 2 In x. 72 the world ground is said to be the asat, or 
the non-existent, with which is identified Aditi, the infinite. 
All that exists is diti, or bounded, while the a-diti, the infinite, 
is non-existent. From the infinite, cosmic force arises, 
though the latter is sometimes said to be the source of 
the infinite itself.3 These theories, however, soon related 
themselves to the non-physical, and physics by alliance 
with religion became metaphysics. 

In the pluralistic stage the several gods, Varuna, Indra, 
Agni, Visvakarman, were looked upon as the authors of 
the universe. * The method of creation is differently con- 
ceived. Some gods are supposed to build the world as 
the carpenter builds a house. The question is raised as to 
how the tree or the wood out of which the work was built 
was obtained . 5 At a later stage the answer is given that 

1 x. 190. * x. 168. 3 x. 72. 3. 

* vii. 86; iii. 32. 80; x. 81. 2.; x. 72. 2; x. 121. 1. 

3 x. 31. 7 ; cf. x. 81. 4. 

VOL. 1 4* 



100 


INDIAN PHILOSOPHY 


Brahman is the tree and the wood out of which heaven 
and earth are made . 1 The conception of organic growth or 
development is also now and then suggested . 2 Sometimes 
the gods are said to create the world by the power of 
sacrifice. This perhaps belongs to a later stage of Vedic 
thought. 

When we get to the monotheistic level the question 
arises as to whether God created the world out of His own 
nature without any pre-existent matter or through His 
power acting on eternally pre-existent matter. The former 
view takes us to the higher monistic conception, while the 
latter remains at the lower monotheistic level, and we 
have both views in the Vedic hymns. In x. 121 we have 
an account of the creation of the world by an Omnipotent 
God out of pre-existent matter. Hiranyagarbha arose in 
the beginning from the great water which pervaded the 
universe. He evolved the beautiful world from the shape- 
less chaos which was all that existed .3 But how did it 
happen, it is asked, that the chaos produced Hiranyagarbha ? 
What is that unknown force or law of development which 
led to his rise ? Who is the author of the primeval waters ? 
According to Manu, Harivamsa and the Puranas, God was 
the author of chaos. He created it by His Will, and 
deposited a seed in it which became the golden germ in 
which He Himself was born as the Brahma or the Creator 
God. " I am Hiranyagarbha, the Supreme Spirit Himself 
become manifested in the form of Hiranyagarbha .”4 Thus 
the two eternally co-existent substances seem to be the 
evolution of the one ultimate substratum. 

This is exactly the theory of a later hymn called the 
Nasadlya hymn, which is translated by Max Muller. 

There was then neither what is nor what is not, there was no sky, 
nor the heaven which is beyond. What covered ? Where 
was it, and in whose shelter ? Was the water the deep abyss 
(in which it lay) ? 

There was no death, hence was there nothing immortal. There was 
no light (distinction) between night and day. That One 
breathed by itself without breath, other than it there has been 
nothing. 

« See Tait. Brah. • x. 12 j. X. 

» Cf. Manu, i. 5. 8 ; Maitri Up., 5. a. « Manu, v. 9 



THE HYMNS OF TIIE RG-VEDA 101 


Darkness there was, in the beginning all this was a sea without light ; 
the germ that lay covered by the husk, that One was born 
by the power of heat (tapas). 

Love overcame it in the beginning, which was the seed springing 
from mind, poets having searched in their heart found by 
wisdom the bond of what is in what is not. 

Their ray which was stretched across, was it below or was it above ? 
There were seed-bearers, there were powers, self-power below, 
and will above. 

Who then knows, who has declared it here, from whence was born 
this creation ? The gods came later than this creation, who 
then knows whence it arose ? 

He from whom this creation arose, whether he made it or did not 
make it, the highest seer in the highest heaven, he forsooth 
knows, or does even he not know ? 1 

We find in this hymn a representation of the most 
advanced theory of creation. First of all there was no 
existent or non-existent. The existent in its manifested 
aspect was not then. We cannot on that account call it 
the non-existent, for it is positive being from which the 
whole existence arrives. The first line brings out the 
inadequacy of our categories. The absolute reality which 
is at the back of the whole world cannot be characterised 
by us as either existent or non-existent. The one breathed 
breathless by its own power . 2 Other than that there was 
not anything beyond. First cause of all it is older than 
the whole world, with the sun, moon, sky and stars. It is 
beyond time, beyond space, beyond age, beyond death and 
beyond immortality. We cannot express what it is except 
that it is. Such is the primal unconditioned groundwork 
of all being. Within that Absolute Consciousness there is 
first the fact of affirmation or positing of the primal “ I.” 
This corresponds to the logical law of identity, A is A, the 
validity of which presupposes the original self-positing. 
Immediately there must be also a non-ego as the correlate 
of the ego. The I confronts the not-I, which answers to 
“ A is not B.” The “ I ” will be a bare affirmation, a mere 
abstraction, unless there is another of which it is conscious. 
If there is no other, there is no ego. The ego implies non- 
ego as its condition. This opposition of ego and non-ego 

* x. 129 ; see also S.S., pp. 65. 65. See £at. Brah., x. .s. 3. 1. 

* Cf. Aristotle’s unmoved mover. 



102 INDIAN PHILOSOPHY 

is the primary antithesis, and the development of this impli- 
cation from the Absolute is said to be by tapas. Tapas is 
just the *' rushing forth,” the spontaneous " out-growth,” 
the projection of being into existence, the energising im- 
pulse, the innate spiritual fervour of the Absolute. Through 
this tapas we get being and non-being, the I and the 
not-I, the active Purusa and the passive prakrti, the forma- 
tive principle and the chaotic matter. The rest of the 
evolution follows from the interaction of these two opposed 
principles. According to the hymn, desire constitutes the 
secret of the being of the world. Desire or kama is the 
sign of self-consciousness, the germ of the mind, manaso 
retah. It is the ground of all advance, the spur of pro- 
gress. The self-conscious ego has desires developed in it 
by the presence of the non-ego. Desire 1 is more than 
thought. It denotes intellectual stir, the sense of deficiency 
as well as active effort. It is the bond binding the existent 
to the non-existent. The unborn, the one, the eternal breaks 
forth into a self-conscious Brahma with matter, darkness, 
non-being, zero, chaos opposed to it. Desire is the essential 
feature of this self-conscious Purusa. The last phrase, 
“ ko veda ? ” (“ who knows ? ”) brings out the mystery of 
creation which has led later thinkers to call it maya. 

There are hymns which stop with the two principles of 
Purusa and prakrti. In x. 82. 5-6, of the hymn to 
Visvakarman, we find it said that the waters of the sea 
contained the first or primordial germ. This first germ is 
the world egg floating on the primeval waters of chaos, 
the principle of the universe of life. From it arises 
Visvakarman, the firstborn of the universe, the creator 
and maker of the world. The waters are the chaos of the 
Greeks, the " without-form and void ” of Genesis, with the 
infinite will reposing on it. z Desire, will, self-conscious- 

1 Greek mythology, it is interesting to notice, connects Eros, the god of 
love, corresponding to Kama, with the creation of the universe. Plato 
says in his Symposium : " Eros neither had any parents nor is be said by any 
unlearned men or by any poet to have had any . . .” According to Aristotle, 
God moves as the object of desire. 

1 Cf. it with the account of the Genesis : " And darkness was on the 
face of the deep and the spirit of God was moving on the face of the waters " 
(Gen. i. 2) ; see also R.V., x. ’21 ; v. 72. 



THE HYMNS OF THE RG-VEDA 103 


ness, mind, vak, or the word, all these are the qualities of 
the infinite intelligence, the personal God brooding over 
the waters, the Narayana resting on the eternal Ananta. 
It is the god of Genesis who says, “ Let there be, and there 
was.” " He thought, I will create the worlds, then He 
created these various worlds, water, light, etc.” The 
Nasadiya hymn, however, overcomes the dualistic meta- 
physics in a higher monism. It makes nature and spirit 
both aspects of the one Absolute. The Absolute itself is 
neither the self nor the other, is neither self-consciousness 
of the type of I, nor unconsciousness of the type of not-I. 
It is a higher than both these. It is a transcending con- 
sciousness. The opposition is developed within itself. 
According to this account the steps of creation, when 
translated into modern terms, are: (i) the Highest Absolute; 
(2) the bare self-consciousness, I am I ; (3) the limit of self- 
consciousness in the form of another. This does not mean 
that there is a particular point at which the Absolute moves 
out. The stages are only logically but not chronologically 
successive. The ego implies the non-ego, and therefore 
cannot precede it. Nor can the non-ego precede the ego. 
Nor can the Absolute be ever without doing tapas. The 
timeless whole is ever breaking out in a series of becomings, 
and the process will go on till the self reaffirms itself 
absolutely in the varied content of experience which is 
never going to be. So the world is always restless. The 
hymn tells us the how of creation, not the whence. It is 
an explanation of the fact of creation. 1 

We see clearly that there is no basis for any conception 
of the unreality of the world in the hymns of the Rg- 
Veda. The world is not a purposeless phantasm, but is 
just the evolution of God. Wherever the word may a 
occurs, it is used only to signify the might or the power : 
“ Indra takes many shapes quickly by his maya.” 2 Yet 
sometimes maya and its derivatives, mayin, mayavant, 

1 Cf. with this the conception of a Demiurge, as used by Plato in the 
Timezus. The conception of creative imagination, set forth by E. Douglas 
Fawcett in his two books. The World as Imagination and Divine Imagining, 
may also be compared. 

• vi. 47. 18. 



104 


INDIAN PHILOSOPHY 


are employed to signify the will of the demons, 1 and we 
also find the word used in the sense of illusion or show. 2 The 
main tendency of the Rg-Veda is a naive realism. Later 
Indian thinkers distinguish five elements, ether or akasa, 
air, fire, water and earth. But the Rg-Veda postulates only 
one, water. It is the primeval matter from which others 
slowly develop. 

It is obviously wrong to think that according to the 
hymn w r e discussed there was originally non-being from 
out of which being grew. The first condition is not absolute 
non-existence, for the hymn admits the reality of the one 
breathing breathless by itself. It is their way of describing 
the absolute reality, the logical ground of the whole uni- 
verse. Being and non-being, which are correlative terms, 
cannot be applied to the One which is beyond all opposi- 
tion. Non-being only means whatever now visibly exists 
had then no distinct existence. In x. 72. 1, it is said, “ the 
existent sprang from the non-existent." Even here it does 
not mean being comes from non-being but only that dis- 
tinct being comes from non-distinct being. So we do not 
agree with the view that the hymn is “ the starting-point of 
the natural philosophy which developed into the Saihkhya 
system.” 3 

The creation of the world is sometimes traced to an 
original material as it were ; in the Purusa Sukta •» we 
find that the gods are the agents of creation, while the 
material out of which the world is made is the body of the 
great Purusa. The act of creation is treated as a sacri- 
fice in which Purusa is the victim. “ Purusa is all this 
world, what has been and shall be.” 5 Anthropomorphism 
when once it is afoot cannot be kept within bounds, and 
the imagination of the Indian brings out the greatness of 
his God by giving him huge dimensions. The poetic 

* v. 2. 9 ; vi. 61. 3 ; i. 3Z. 4 ; vii. 49. 4 ; vii. 98. 5. 

* x. 54. 2. 

3 See Macdonell, Vedic Reader, p. 207. There are Yedic thinkers who 
postulate being or non-being as the first principle (x. 129. 1 ; x. 72. 2) so 
far as the world of experience is concerned, and these perhaps gave rise to 
the later logical theories of satkaryavada, the existence of the effect in the 
cause, and asatkaryavada, the non-existence of the effect in the cause. 

* x. 9°- I x. 90. *. 



THE HYMNS OF THE RG-VEDA 105 


mind conjures up a vast composition pointing out the one- 
ness of the whole, world and God. This hymn is not, 
however, inconsistent with the theory of creation from the 
One Absolute described above. The whole world even 
according to it is due to the self-diremption of the Absolute 
into subject and object, Purusa and Prakrti. Only the 
idea is rather crudely allegorised. The supreme reality 
becomes the active Purusa, for it is said : “ From the 
Purusa Virat was born, and from Virat again Purusa.” 
Purusa is thus the begetter as well as the begotten. He 
is the Absolute as well as the self-conscious I. 


IX 


Religion 

We have seen how physical phenomena first came to 
attract attention and were assigned personalities. The 
deification of natural phenomena has a mischievous influ- 
ence on religious thought and practice. The world becomes 
peopled with gods possessed of the human sense of justice 
and capable of being influenced by the human qualities of 
hate and love. Many of the gods are not even sufficiently 
humanised and easily lapse into their past naturalistic condi- 
tion. Indra, for example, born of waters and cloud, some- 
times crashes down from heaven in thunder. Vedic gods, 
as Bloomfield says, represent “ arrested personification.” 
But even the humanised gods are only crudely personal. 
They have hands and feet like men. They are given the 
actual bodily shape, the warring passions of the human 
breast, the outer polish of a fair skin, and the dignity of a 
long beard. They fight and feast, drink and dance, eat 
and rejoice. Some of them are described to be priests in 
function such as Agni and Brhaspati ; others are warriors, 
like Indra and the Maruts. Their food is just the favourite 
food of man, milk and butter, ghee and grain , their 
favourite drink is the Soma juice. They have their share 
of human weakness and are easily pleased by flattery. 
Sometimes they are so stupidly self-centred that they 
begin to discuss what they should give. “ This is what I 



106 


INDIAN PHILOSOPHY 


will do — not that, I will give him a cow or shall it be a 
horse ? I wonder if I have really had Soma from him.” 1 
In their eyes a rich offering is much more efficacious than 
a sincere prayer. It is a very simple law of give and take 
that binds gods and men, though the perfect reciprocity 
governing their relations in the later Brahmanas is yet 
remote. 

“ To make the elements of a nature religion human is 
inevitably to make them vicious. There is no great moral 
harm in worshipping a thunderstorm even though the 
lightning strikes the good and the evil quite recklessly. 
There is no need to pretend that the lightning is exercising 
a wise and righteous choice, but when once you worship 
an imaginary quasi-human being who throws the lightning 
you are in a dilemma. Either you have to admit that 
you are worshipping and flattering a being with no moral 
sense, because he happens to be dangerous, or else you 
have to invent reasons for his wrath against the people 
who happen to be struck. And they are pretty sure to 
be bad reasons. The God if personal becomes capricious 
and cruel.” 2 3 True to this view, the Vedic worship of the 
natural powers is not quite sincere, but utilitarian. We 
fear the gods whose effects arc dangerous to us, and love 
those that help us in our daily pursuits. We pray to 
Indra to send down rain, and yet beg him not to send the 
storm. The sun is implored to impart a gentle warmth, and 
not force the world into drought and famine by scorching 
heat. The gods become the sources of material prosperity, 
and prayers for the goods of the world are very common. 
And since there is a division of functions and attributes, 
we pray to particular deities for specific things. 3 The 
invocations to the gods are monotonously simple. 4 The gods 
were conceived as strong rather than good, powerful rather 
than moral. Such a religion is not capable of satisfying 
men’s ethical aspirations. It shows the strong moral sense 
of the Vedic Aryan, that in spite of the prevalent tendency 


1 Oldenberg : Ancient India, p. 71. 

* Gilbert Murray : Four Stages of Greek Religion, p. 88. 

3 x. 47. r ; iv. 32. 4 ; ii. 1 ; ii. 6 ; vii. 59 ; vii. 24. 6 ; vii. 67. 16. 
i x. 42. 4. 



THE HYMNS OF THE RG-VEDA 107 


of utilitarian worship he yet regards the gods as being in 
general moral as inclined to help the good and punish the 
wicked. The highest religious aspiration of man to unite 
himself with the Supreme is recognised. 1 The many gods 
are helpful only as enabling their devotees to reach the 
Supreme. 1 * * * 

It was inevitable that sacrifices should come. For the 
depth of one’s affection for God consists in the surrender 
of one’s property and possessions to Him. We pray and 
offer. Even when sacrificial offerings came into fashion, 
the spirit was considered more important and the real 
nature of the sacrifice was insisted on. “ Utter a powerful 
speech to Indra which is sweeter than butter or honey.” 3 
Sraddha or faith in all ceremonies is necessary. 4 Varuna is 
a god who looks into the secret recesses of the human heart 
to find out the deep-lying motive. Gradually having con- 
ceived the gods as human, much too human, they thought 
that a full meal was the best way to the heart of God.5 

The question of human sacrifice is much debated. The 
case of Sunassepa 6 * does not indicate that human sacrifices 
are either allowed or encouraged in the Vedas. We hear 
of horse sacrifices.7 But against all such there were pro- 
tests heard even then. Sama Veda says : “ O, Ye Gods ! 
We use no sacrificial stake. We slay no victim. We 
worship entirely by the repetition of the sacred verses.” 8 
This cry of revolt is taken up by the Upanisads and 
carried on by the Buddhist and the Jaina schools. 

Sacrifices represent the second stage of the Vedic religion. 
In the first it was simple prayer. According to Parasa- 
rasmrti we have " meditation in the Krtayuga, sacrifices 
in the Treta, worship in the Dvapara, praises and prayers 

1 R.V., x. 88. 15 ; i. 125. 5 ; x. 107. 2. * i. 24. 1. 

J ii. 24. 20; vi. 15. 47. * i. 55 5 ; i. 133. 5; i. 104. 6. 

5 “ Ritual in Homer is simple and uniform. It consists of prayer accom- 

panied by the sprinkling of the grain, followed by animal burnt offering. 

Part of the flesh is tasted by the worshippers and then made over by burning 

to the gods. The rest is eaten as a banquet with abundance of wine ” 

(Harrison: Stages of Grecian Life, pp. 87-8S). Agni is pre-eminently the 
god of sacrifices in India. It is so even in ancient Greece. Fire carries 
the offerings from earth to heavenly gods. In all these things t hero is 
nothing specially Indian. 

‘ R.V., i. 6. 24. 7 R.V., ii., iii. . vi., vii. * i., ii. 9. 3 , 



108 INDIAN nilLOSOPIIY 

in Kali.” This view accords well with what the Visnu- 
purana says that the rules of sacrifices were formulated in 
the tretayuga. 1 We may not agree with the division into 
yugas, but the logic of the growth of religious practice from 
meditation to sacrifice, from sacrifice to worship, from 
worship to praise and prayer, seems to be founded on fact. 

The Vedic religion does not seem to be an idolatrous 
one. There were then no temples for gods. Men had 
direct communion with gods without any mediation. Gods 
were looked upon as friends of their worshippers. “ Father 
Heaven,” “ Mother Earth,” Brother Agni ” — these are no 
idle phrases. There was a very intimate personal relation- 
ship between men and gods. Religion seems to have domi- 
nated the whole life. The dependence on God was com- 
plete. The people prayed for even the ordinary necessities 
of life. “ Give us this day our daily bread ” was true to 
the spirit of the Vedic Aryan. It is the sign of a truly 
devout nature to depend on God for even the creature 
comforts of existence. As we have already said, we have 
the essentials of the highest theism in the worship of Varuna. 
If bhakti means faith in a personal God, love for Him, dedi- 
cation of everything to His service and the attainment of 
moksa or freedom by personal devotion, surely we have all 
these elements in Varuna worship. 

In x. 15 and x. 54 we have two hymns addressed to 
the pitaras or fathers, the blessed dead w'ho dwell in heaven. 
In the Vedic hymns they are invoked together with the 
devas. 2 They are supposed to come in the form of invis- 
ible spirits to receive the prayers and offerings at sacrifices. 
The social tradition is revered perhaps in the worship of 
the fathers. There are, however, some students of the Vedas 
who believe that the hymns of the Rg-Veda do not know 
of any obsequial offerings to ancestral manes . 3 

A criticism that is generally urged against the Vedic 
religion is that the consciousness of sin is absent in the 
Veda. This is an erroneous view. Sin, in the Vedas, is 
alienation from God. 4 The Vedic conception of sin is analo- 
gous to the Hebrew’ theory. The will of God is the standard 

* vi. 2 ; See the story of Pururavas. * x. 75. 

3 Behari Lai : The Vedas, [> 101. 4 vii. 86 6 ; see also vii. 88 5, 6. 



109 


THE HYMNS OF THE RG-VEDA 

of morality. Human guilt is short-coming. We sin when 
we transgress the commands of God. The gods are the 
upholders of the Rta, the moral order of the world. They 
protect the good and punish the wicked. Sin is not merely 
the omission of the external duties. There are moral sins 
as well as ritual sins. 1 It is a consciousness of sin that calls 
for propitiatory sacrifices. Especially in the conception of 
Varuna we have the sense of sin and forgiveness which 
reminds us of modern Christian doctrines. 

While as a rule the gods of the Rg-Veda are regarded 
as the guardians of morality, some of them still retain 
their egoistic passions, being only magnified men, nor are 
there poets wanting who are able to see the hollowness 
of all this. One hymn 1 points out how all gods and 
men are dominated by self-interest. The decay of the 
old Vedic worship is traceable to this low conception of 
many gods. Otherwise we cannot understand the beautiful 
hymn, 3 which recommends the duty of benevolence with- 
out any reference to gods. The gods seem to have become 
too weak to support a pure morality. The idea of an 
ethics independent of religion popularised in Buddhism is 
suggested here. 


X 

Ethics 

Turning to the ethics of the Rg-Veda, we find that the 
conception of Rta is of great significance. It is the antici- 
pation of the law of karma, one of the distinguishing 
characteristics of Indian thought. It is the law which 
pervades the whole world, which all gods and men must 
obey. If there is law in the world, it must work itself out. 
If by any chance its effects are not revealed here on earth, 
they must be brought to fruition elsewhere. Where law is, 
disorder and injustice are only provisional and partial. 
The triumph of the wicked is not absolute. The shipwreck 
of the good need not cause despair. 

Rta furnishes us with a standard of morality. It 
is the universal essence of things. It is the satya or 

* i. 23. 22 ; i. 85. * ix. 1 15. 3 x. 117. 



110 


INDIAN PHILOSOPHY 


the truth of things. Disorder or An-Rta is falsehood, the 
opposite of truth. 1 The good are those who follow the 
path of Rta, the true and the ordered. Ordered conduct 
is called a true vrata. Vratani are the ways of life of 
good men who follow the path of Rta. 2 Consistency is 
the central feature of a good life. The good man of the 
Vedas does not alter his ways. Varuna, the perfect example 
of the follower of Rta, is a dhrtavrata, of unalterable ways. 
When ritual grew in importance, Rta became a synonym for 
yajna or sacrificial ceremony. 

After giving us a general account of the ideal life, the 
hymns detail the specific contents of the moral life. Prayers 
are to be offered to the gods. Rites are to be performed.3 
The Vedas assume a very close and intimate relationship 
between men and gods. The life of man has to be led 
under the very eye of God. Apart from the duties owed 
to gods there are also duties to man. 4 Kindness to all is 
enjoined ; hospitality is reckoned a great virtue. “ The 
riches of one who gives do not diminish. ... He who 
possessed of food hardens his heart against the feeble man 
craving nourishment, against the sufferer coming to him 
(for help) and pursues (his own enjoyment even) before him, 
that man finds no consoler.” 5 Sorcery, witchcraft, seduc- 
tion and adultery are condemned as vicious. 6 Gambling 
is denounced. Virtue is conformity to the law of God, 
which includes the love of man. Vice is disobedience to 
this law. ‘‘If we have sinned against the man who loves 
us, have ever wronged friend or comrade, have ever done 
an injury to a neighbour who ever dwelt with us or even 
to a stranger, O Lord ! free us from the guilt of this tres- 
pass.” 7 Some of the gods cannot be persuaded or diverted 
from the paths of righteousness by any amount of offerings. 
“ In them is to be discerned neither right nor left, neither 
before nor behind. They neither wink nor sleep, they 
penetrate all things ; they see through both evil and good ; 

> See R.V., vii. 56. 12 ; ix. 115. 4 ; ii 6. 10 ; iv. 5. 5 ; viii. 6. 2 ; 12; 
vii. 47. 3. 

> ix. 121. 1 ; x. 37. 5. 3 R.V., i. 104 6 ; i. 108. 6 ; ii. 26. 3 ; x. 151. 

« R.V., x. 1 17. 5 viii. 6. 5 ; i. 2. 6. 

‘ vii. 104. 8 ff ; iv. 5. 5. 7 R.V., v. 85. 7. 



THE HYMNS OF THE RG-VEDA 111 

everything, even the most distant, is near to them ; they 
abhor and punish death ; sustain and support all that lives.” 
There are also indications of an ascetic tendency. Indra 
is said to have conquered heaven by asceticism. 1 But the 
dominant note is not one of asceticism. In the hymns we 
find a keen delight in the beauties of nature, its greatness, 
its splendour and its pathos. The motive of the sacrifices 
is love of the good things of the world. We have yet the 
deep joy in life and the world untainted by any melancholy 
gloom. Ascetic practices were, however, known. Fasting 
and abstinence were regarded as means of attaining various 
supernatural powers. In ecstatic moods it is said that the 
gods have entered into men. 2 The earliest reference to 
the ecstatic condition of ascetic sages is in Rg-Veda, x. 136.3 
The Purusa Sukta has the first reference to the 
division of Hindu society into the four classes. To under- 
stand the natural way in which this institution arose, we 
must remember that the Aryan conquerors were divided by 
differences of blood and racial ancestry from the conquered 
tribes of India. The original Aryans all belonged to one 
class, every one being priest and soldier, trader and tiller 
of the soil. There was no privileged order of priests. The 
complexity of life led to a division of classes among the 
Aryans. Though to start with each man could offer sacri- 
fices to gods without anybody's mediation, priesthood and 
aristocracy separated themselves from the proletariat. 
Originally the term Vaisya referred to the whole people. 
As we shall see, when sacrifices assume an important 
role, when the increasing complexity of life rendered 
necessary division of life, certain families, distinguished for 
learning, wisdom, poetic and speculative gifts, became 
representatives in worship under the title of Purohita, or 
one set in front. When the Vedic religion developed into 
a regulated ceremonialism, these families formed themselves 
into a class. In view of their great function of conserving 
the tradition of the Aryans, this class was freed from the 
necessity of the struggle for existence. For those engaged 
in the feverish ardour of life cannot afford the freedom 

* x. 127. * x - 86. 2. 

I See also vii. 59. 6 ; x. 114. 2 ; x. 167. 1 ; x. 109. 4. 



112 


INDIAN PHILOSOPHY 


and the leisure necessary for thought and reflection. Thus 
one class concerned with the things of spirit came into 
existence. The Brahmins are not a priesthood pledged to 
support fixed doctrines, but an intellectual aristocracy 
charged with the moulding of the higher life of the 
people. The kings who became the patrons of the 
learned Brahmins were the Ksatriyas or the princes who 
had borne rule in those days. The word Ksatriya comes 
from Ksatra, “rule, dominion.” It has the same meaning 
in the Veda, the Avesta and the Persian inscriptions. The 
rest were classed as the people or the Vaisyas. Originally 
occupational, the division soon became hereditary. In the 
period of the hymns, professions were not restricted to 
particular castes. Referring to the diversity of men’s 
tastes, one verse says : “ I am a poet, my father is a doctor, 
my mother a grinder of com.” 1 There are also passages 
indicative of the rising power of the Brahmin. “ In his 
own house he dwells in peace and comfort, to him for ever 
holy food flows richly, to him the people with free will 
pay homage — the king with whom the Brahmin has prece- 
dence.” 2 Those who followed the learned professions, 
those who fought, those who traded all belonged to one 
whole, which was divided by a wider gulf from the con- 
quered races, who were grouped into two broad divisions of 
(a) the Dravidians, forming the fourth estate, and ( b ) the 
aboriginal tribes. The division into Aryans and Dasyus is 
a racial one, being based on blood and descent. It is some- 
times said that the aborigines converted and accepted by 
the Aryans are the Sudras, while those excluded by them 
are the Panchamas.3 It is maintained by others that the 
Aryans had in their own communities Sudras even before 
they came to the southern part of India. It is not easy 
to decide between these rival hypotheses. 

The system of caste is in reality neither Aryan nor 
Dravidian, but was introduced to meet the needs of the time 
when the different racial types had to live together in amity. 
It was then the salvation of the country, whatever its 
present tendency may be. The only way of conserving the 

■ ix. i i 2. 3. * iv. 50. 8. 

I See Farquhar: Outline of the Religious Literature of India, p. 6 



THE HYMNS OF THE RG-VEDA 113 


culture of a race which ran the great risk of being 
absorbed by the superstitions of the large numbers of 
native inhabitants, was to pin down rigidly by iron bonds 
the existing differences of culture and race. Unfortunately 
this device to prevent the social organisation from decay 
and death ultimately prevented it even from growing . 1 
The barriers did not show any signs of weakening when the 
tide of progress demanded it. While they contributed to 
the preservation of the social order they did not help the 
advancement of the nation as a whole. But this gives us no 
right to condemn the institution of caste as it was originally 
introduced. Only caste made it possible for a number 
of races to live together side by side without fighting each 
other. India solved peaceably the inter-racial problem 
which other people did by a decree of death. When European 
races conquered others, they took care to efface their human 
dignity and annihilate their self-respect. Caste enabled the 
Vedic Indian to preserve the integrity and independence of 
the conquering as well as the conquered races and promote 
mutual confidence and harmony. 


XI 

Eschatology 

The Vedic Aryans entered India in the pride of strength 
and joy of conquest. They loved life in its fullness. They 
therefore showed no great interest in the future of the soul. 
Life to them was bright and joyous, free from all the vexa- 
tions of a fretful spirit. They were not enamoured of 
death. They wished for themselves and their posterity a 
life of a hundred autumns . 2 They had no special doctrines 
about life after death, though some vague conceptions 

■ Referring to the hardening of classes into castes, Rhys Davids writes : 
“ It is most probable that this momentous step followed upon and was 
chiefly due to the previous establishment of a similar hard and fast line 
preventing any one belonging to the non-Aryan tribes from inter-marrying 
with an Aryan family or being incorporated into the Aryan race. It was 
the hereditary disability the Aryans had succeeded m imposing upon races 
they despised, which, reacting within their own circle and strengthened by 
the very intolerance that gave it birth, has borne such bitter fruit through 
so many centuries ” ( Hibbert Lectures, p. 23). * R.V., x. 18. 



114 INDIAN PHILOSOPHY 

about heaven and hell could not be avoided by reflec- 
tive minds. Rebirth is still at a distance. The Vedic 
Aryans were convinced that death was not the end of 
things. After night, the day ; after death, life. Beings 
who once had been, could never cease to be. They must 
exist somewhere, perhaps in the realm of the setting sun 
where Yama rules. The imagination of man with his 
shuddering fear of death had not yet made Yama into a 
terrible lord of vengeance. Yama and Yami are the first 
mortals who entered the other world to lord over it. 
When a man dies he is supposed to reach Yama’s king- 
dom. Yama had found for us a place, a home which is 
not to be taken from us. When the body is thrown off, 
the soul becomes endowed with a shining spiritual form 
and goes to the abode of gods where Yama and the fathers 
live immortal. The dead are supposed to get to this 
paradise by passing over water and a bridge. 1 A refer- 
ence to the paths of the fathers and the gods is found in 
x. 88. 15. This might be, as has been suggested, due to 
the distinction of the ways in which the smoke ascends in 
cremation and sacrifice. The distinction is yet in an 
undeveloped form. 

The departed souls dwell in heaven revelling with 
Yama. They there live an existence like ours. The joys 
of heaven are those of earth perfected and heightened. 
“ These bright things are the portion of those who bestow 
largesses ; there are suns for them in heaven ; they attain 
immortality; they prolong their lives.” 3 Stress is sometimes 
laid on the sensuous character in the Vedic picture of future 
life. But as Deussen observes : “ Even Jesus represents 
the kingdom of heaven as a festal gathering where they 
sit down to table 3 and drink wine/ and even a Dante 
or a Milton could not choose but borrow all the colours 
for their pictures from this world of earth.” 5 The gods 
are supposed to become immortal through the power of 
the Soma. To become like gods is the goal of our 
endeavour. For the gods live in a spiritual paradise enjoy- 

1 x. 6. 10 ; ix. 41. 2. 1 i. 25. 6. 

J Watt. vii. 11. « Matt. xxvi. 9. 

i The Philosophy of the Vpamsads, p. 320. 



THE HYMNS OF THE RG-VEDA 115 


ing a kind of unalloyed bliss. They neither hunger nor 
thirst, neither marry nor are given in marriage. In their 
ideal descriptions of the other world, the contrast between 
the life on earth and the life hereafter arises. The blessed 
gods live for ever. We are children of a day. The gods 
have happiness in heaven above where Yama rules ; we 
have misery for our lot on earth. What should we do to 
gain immortality ? We have to offer sacrifices to gods, 
since immortality is a free gift from heaven to the god- 
fearing. The good man who worships the gods becomes 
immortal. “ Sage Agni ! The mortal who propitiates thee 
becomes a moon in heaven.” 1 Already the difficulty is felt. 
Does he become the moon or does he become like the moon ? 
Sayana explains it as : “ He becomes like the moon, the 
rejoicer of all ” ; 2 others contend that he becomes the moon. 3 
There are indications that the Vedic Aryan believed in the 
possibility of meeting his ancestors after his death. 4 

The question arises what happens to us if we do not 
worship the gods. Is there a hell corresponding to a heaven, 
a separate place for the morally guilty, the heretics, who 
do not believe in gods ? If the heaven is only for the 
pious and the good, then the evil-minded cannot be extin- 
guished at death nor can they reach heaven. So a hell is 
necessary. We hear of Varuna thrusting the evil-doer 
down into the dark abyss from which he never returns. 
Indra is prayed to consign to the lower darkness the man 
who injures his worshipper.5 It seems to be the destiny 
of the wicked to fall into this dark depth and disappear. 
We do not as yet get the grotesque mythology of hell and 
its horrors of the later puranas. Heaven for the righteous 
and hell for the wicked is the rule. Reward follows 
righteousness, and punishment misconduct. I do not think 
that the joyless regions veiled in blind darkness into which 
the ignorant pass after death are only the world in which 
we live, though that is Deussen’s view. We have no ink- 
lings as yet of samsara or even gradations of happiness. 
There is a passage in the Rg-Veda 6 which reads : " After 

* ii. 2 ; x. i. 3. * Ahladaka sarvesam. 

I Candra eva bhavati. * > 24. I ; vii. 56. 24. 

I x. 132. 4 ; iv. 5. 5 : ix 73. * ; x 152. 4. ‘ iv. 27. !. 



116 INDIAN PHILOSOPHY 

he has completed what he has to do and has become old 
he departs hence ; departing hence he is once more born ; 
this is the third birth.” This has reference to the Vedic 
theory that every man has three births : the first as a 

child, the second by spiritual education, and the third after 
death. We meet with the belief in the soul as a moving 
life principle. 1 In x. 58, the soul of an apparently unconscious 
man is invited to come back to him from the trees, the sky 
and the sun. Evidently it was thought that the soul could 
be separated from the body in certain abnormal conditions. 
All this, however, does not imply that the Vedic Aryans 
were familiar with the conception of rebirth. 

XII 

Conclusion 

The hymns form the foundation of subsequent Indian 
thought. While the Brahmanas emphasise the sacrificial 
ritual shadowed forth in the hymns, the Upanisads carry 
out their philosophical suggestions. The theism of the 
Bhagavadgita is only an idealisation of Varuna-worship. 
The great doctrine of karma is yet in its infancy as Rta. 
The dualistic metaphysics of the Samkhya is the logical 
development of the conception of Hiranyagarbha floating 
on the waters. The descriptions of the ecstatic conditions 
caused by the performance of sacrifice or the singing of 
hymns or the effects of the Soma juice when we see 
the glories of the heavenly world remind us of the yogic 
states of divine blessedness where voices are heard and 
visions seen. 

REFERENCES. 

Max Muller and Oldenberg : The Vedic Hymns; S.B.E., 

vols. xxxii and xlvi. 

Muir : Original Sanskrit Texts, vol. v. 

Ragozin : Vedic India. 

Max Muller : Six Systems of Indian Philosophy, chap. ii. 

Kaegi : The Rg-Veda (Eng. Trans.). 

Ghate : Lectures on the Rg-Veda. 

Macdonell : Vedic Mythology ; Vedic Reader. 

Barua : Pre-Bi.ddhistic Indian Philosophy, pp. 1-38. 

Bloomfield : The Religion of the Veda. 

• i. 164. 30. 



CHAPTER III 


TRANSITION TO THE UPANISADS 

The general character of the Atharva-Veda — Conflict of cultures — The 
primitive religion of the Atharva-Veda — Magic and mysticism — 
The Yajur-Veda — The Brahmanas — Their religion of sacrifice and 
prayer — The dominance of the priest — The authoritativeness of the 
Veda — Cosmology — Ethics — Caste — Future life. 


I 

The Atharva-Veda 

“ The hymns of the Rg-Veda inextricably confused ; the 
deities of an earlier era confounded ; and again merged 
together in a pantheon now complete ; the introduction 
of strange gods ; recognition of a hell of torture ; instead 
of many divinities, the one that represents all the gods 
and nature as well ; incantations for evil purposes and 
charms for a worthy purpose ; formulae of malediction to 
be directed against those ‘ whom I hate and who hate me ’ ; 
magical verses to obtain children, to prolong life, to dispel 
evil magic, to guard against poison and other ills ; the 
paralysing extreme of ritualistic reverence indicated by 
the exaltation to godhead of the ‘ remnant ’ of sacrifice ; 
hymns to snakes, to diseases, to sleep, time, and the stars ; 
curses on the ‘ priest plaguer ’ — such in general outline 
is the impression produced by a perusal of the Atharvan 
after that of the Rg-Veda.” 1 In the Rg-Veda we come 
across strange utterances of incantations and spells, charms 
and witchcrafts, hymns to inanimate things, devils and 
demons, etc. We have the charms of the robbers to lull the 
dwellers in a house to sleep, 2 spells to prevent evil spirits 

* Hopkins: The Religions of India, p. 151. • R.V., vii., 55, 

11T 



118 


INDIAN PHILOSOPHY 


causing women to miscarry , 1 and charms to expel diseases . 3 
Though sorcery and magic prevailed in the times of the 
Rg-Veda, the Vedic seers did not encourage or recognise 
them. The stray references have the appearance of an 
external addition, while in the Atharva-Veda they are the 
main theme. 

The weird religion that the Atharva-Veda represents 
is doubtless older than that of the Rg-Veda, though the 
Atharva-Veda collection is a later one. The Vedic Aryans 
as they advanced into India came across uncivilised tribes, 
wild and barbarous, and worshipping snakes and serpents, 
stocks and stones. No society can hope to continue in a 
state of progressive civilisation in the midst of uncivilised 
and half-civilised tribes, if it does not meet and overcome the 
new situation by either completely conquering them or impart- 
ing to them elements of its own culture. The alternatives 
before us are either to destroy the barbarian neighbours 
or absorb them, thus raising them to a higher level, or allow 
ourselves to be overwhelmed and swamped by them. The 
first course was impossible on account of the paucity of 
numbers. The pride of race and culture worked against 
the third. The second was the only alternative left open, 
and it was adopted. While the Rg-Veda describes the 
period of conflict between the fair-skinned Aryans and the 
dark Dasyus, which Indian mythology makes into a strife 
of Devas and Raksasas, the Atharva-Veda speaks to us of 
the period when the conflict is settled and the two are trying 
to live in harmony by mutual give and take. The spirit of 
accommodation naturally elevated the religion of the primi- 
tive tribes but degraded the Vedic religion by introducing 
into it sorcery and witchcraft. The worship of spirits and 
stars, trees and mountains and other superstitions of jungle 
tribes crept into the Vedic religion. The effort of the Vedic 
Aryan to educate the uncivilised resulted in the corruption 
of the ideal which he tried to spread. In his Introduction 
to the translation of the selections from the Atharva-Veda, 
Bloomfield remarks: " Even witchcraft is part of the Hindu’s 
religion; it had penetrated and become intimately blended 
with the holiest Vedic rites; the broad current of popular 

* R.V., x. 122. • R.V., x. 163. 



TRANSITION TO THE UPANISADS 119 


religion and superstition has infiltrated itself through number- 
less channels into the higher religion that is presented by 
the Brahmin priests, and it may be presumed that the priests 
were neither able to cleanse their own religious beliefs from 
the mass of folk belief with which it was surrounded, nor 
is it at all likely that they found it in their interest to do 
so.” 1 Such are the revenges which the weak of the world 
have on the strong. The explanation of the miscellaneous 
character of the Hindu religion, which embraces all the 
intermediate regions of thought and belief from the wandering 
fancies of savage superstitions to the highest insight of daring 
thought, is here. From the beginning the Aryan religion 
was expansive, self-developing and tolerant. It went on 
accommodating itself to the new forces it met with in its 
growth. In this can be discerned a refined sense of true 
humility and sympathetic understanding. The Indian 
refused to ignore the lower religions and fight them out 
of existence. He did not possess the pride of the fanatic 
that his was the one true religion. If a god satisfies the 
human mind in its own way, it is a form of truth. None 
can lay hold upon the whole of truth. It can be won only 
by degrees, partially and provisionally. But they forgot 
that intolerance was sometimes a virtue. There is such a 
thing as Gresham’s law in religious matters also. When 
the Aryan and the non-Aryan religions, one refined and 
the other vulgar, the one good and the other base, met, 
there was the tendency for the bad to beat the good out 
of circulation. 


II 

Theology 

The religion of the Atharva-Veda is that of the primitive 
man, to whom the world is full of shapeless ghosts and 
spirits of death. When he realises his helplessness against 
the natural forces, the precariousness of his own existence 
so constantly subject to death, he makes death and disease, 
failure of monsoon and earthquake, the playground of his 

■ S.B.E., voi. xliii. 



120 INDIAN PHILOSOPHY 

fancy. The world becomes crowded with goblins and 
gods, and the catastrophes of the world are traced to dis- 
satisfied spirits. When a man falls ill, the magician and 
not the physician is sent for, and he employs spells to entice 
the spirit away from the patient . 1 The terrific powers could 
only be appeased by bloody sacrifices, human and animal. 
The fear of death gave a loose rein to superstition. Madame 
Ragozin writes : “ We have here, as though in opposition 
to the bright, cheerful pantheon of beneficent deities, so 
trustingly and gratefully addressed by the Rsis of the 
Rg-Veda, a weird repulsive world of darkly scowling demons, 
inspiring abject fear such as never sprang from Aryan 
fancy.” 2 The religion of the Atharva-Veda is an amalgam 
of Aryan and non- Aryan ideals. The distinction between 
the spirit of the Rg-Veda and that of the Atharva-Veda is 
thus described by Whitney : “ In the Rg-Veda the gods 
are approached with reverential awe, indeed, but with 
love and confidence also ; a worship is paid them which 
exalts the offerer of it ; the demons embraced under the 
general name Raksas are objects of horror, whom the 
gods ward off and destroy ; the divinities of the Atharva 
are regarded rather with a kind of cringing fear, as powers 
whose wrath is to be deprecated and whose favour curried ; 
it knows a whole host of imps and hobgoblins, in ranks and 
classes, and addresses itself to them directly, offering them 
homage to induce them to abstain from doing harm. The 
mantra, prayer, which in the older Veda is the instrument 
of devotion, is here rather the tool of superstition ; it wrings 
from the unwilling hands of the gods the favours which of 
old their goodwill to men induced them to grant, or by 
simple magical power obtains the fulfilment of the utterer’s 
wishes. The most prominent feature of the Atharva is the 
multitude of incantations which it contains. These are 
pronounced either by the person who is himself to be benefited 
or more often by the sorcerer for him, and are directed to the 
procuring of the greatest variety of desirable ends. . . . There 

1 If such a view persisted, it was because it had an element of truth. 
Modern psychology has come to recognise the power of suggestion as a 
remedy for the ills of the flesh, specially nervous disorders. 

* Vedic India, pp. 117-118. 



TRANSITION TO THE UPANISADS 121 


are hymns, too, in which a single rite or ceremony is taken 
up and exalted, somewhat in the same strain as the Soma 
in the Pavamana hymns of the Rg ; others of a speculative 
mystical character are not wanting ; yet their number is 
not so great as might naturally be expected, considering 
the development which the Hindu religion received in the 
periods following after that of the primitive Veda. It seems 
in the main that the Atharva is a popular rather than 
a priestly religion ; that, in making the transition from the 
Vedic to modern times, it forms an intermediate step, rather 
to the gross idolatries and superstitions of the ignorant 
mass than to the sublimated pantheism of the Brahmins.” 1 
A religion of magic, with its childish reliance on sorcery and 
witchcraft, takes the place of the purer Vedic religion ; the 
medicine man who knows how to scatter the spirits and 
control them holds the supreme position. We hear of great 
ascetics who obtain the mastery of nature by tapas. They 
reduce the elemental forces to their control by their asceticism. 
It was then well known that ecstatic conditions could be 
induced by the mortification of the body. Man can partici- 
pate in divine power by the hidden force of magic. The 
professors of magic and witchcraft were accepted by the 
Vedic seers, and their calling was dignified, with the result 
that magic and mysticism soon became confused. We find 
people sitting in the midst of five fires, standing on one 
leg, holding an arm above the head, all for the purpose of 
commanding the forces of nature and subduing the gods 
to their will. 

While the Atharva-Veda gives us an idea of demonology 
prevalent among the superstitious tribes of India, it is more 
advanced in some parts than the Rg-Veda, and has certain 
elements in common with the Upanisads and the Brahmanas. 
W e have the worship of Kala, time ; Kama, or love ; Skambha, 
or support. The greatest of them all is Skambha. He is 
the ultimate principle, called indiscriminately Prajapati, 
Purusa and Brahman. He includes all space and time, gods 
and Vedas and the moral powers. 2 Rudra is the lord of 
animals, and forms the point of linkage between the Vedic 
religion and the later Siva worship. Siva in the Rg-Veda 

1 P.A.O.S., iii. fp. 307-8, * See x. 7. 7. 13, 17. 



1*22 


INDIAN PHILOSOPHY 


means only auspicious, but is not the name of a god ; the 
Rudra in the Rg-Veda is a malignant cattle-destroying 
deity. 1 Here he is the lord of all cattle, Pasupati. Prana 
is hailed as a life-giving principle of nature. 1 The 
doctrine of vital forces which figures so much in later 
Indian metaphysics is first mentioned here, and may possibly 
be a development of the principle of air of the Rg-Veda. 
While the deities of the Rg-Veda were of both sexes, the 
males were more prominent. In the Atharva-Veda the 
emphasis is shifted. No wonder in Tantric philosophies 
sex becomes the basis. The sacredness of the cow is recog- 
nised, and Brahma-loka is mentioned in the Atharva-Veda. 3 
Hell is known by its proper name. Naraka, with all its 
horror and tortures,4 is fairly familiar. 

Even the magical portion of the Atharva-Veda shows 
Aryan influence. If magic has to be accepted, the next 
best thing is to refine it. Bad magic is condemned and good 
magic encouraged. Many charms make for harmony in 
family and village life. The barbarous and bloody sacrifices 
which still persist in unaryanised parts of India are condemned. 
The old title of the Atharva-Veda, “ Atliarvangirasah,” shows 
that there were two different strata in it, one of Atharvan 
and the other of Angiras. The former refers to auspicious 
practices used for healing purposes. 5 The hostile practices 
belong to the Angirases. The first is medicine and the 
second is witchcraft, and the two are mixed up. 

The Atharva-Veda, the result of so much compromise, 
seemed to have had a good deal of trouble in obtaining 
recognition as a Veda. 6 It was regarded with contempt, 
since its central feature was sorcery. It contributed to the 
growth of a pessimistic outlook in India. Men cannot 
believe in the devil and the tempter and yet retain joy 
in life. To see demons close at hand is to shudder at 
life. In fairness to the Atharva-Veda, it must be recog - 

* R.V., iv. 3. 6 ; i. 114. 10. * A.V , x. 7. 

3 xix. 71. 1. 4 xii. 4. 36. 

5 Bhesajani, A.Y., xi. 6. 14. 

* In many of the early scriptures we have only the three Vedas mentioned, 
R.V., x. 90. 9 ; v. 7. 1 ; Tait. Up., ii. 2-3. The canonical works of the 
Buddhists do not mention the Atharva-Veda. At a later date the Atharva- 
Veda also acquired the status of a Veda. 



TRANSITION TO THE UPANISADS 123 


nised that it helped to prepare the way for the scientific 
development in India. 


Ill 

The Yajur-Veda and the Brahmanas 

In the history of thought creative and critical epochs 
succeed each other. Periods of rich and glowing faith are 
followed by those of aridity and artificiality. When we 
pass from the Rg-Veda to the Yajur and the Sanaa Vedas 
and the Brahmanas, we feel a change in the atmosphere. 
The freshness and simplicity of the former give place to the 
coldness and artificiality of the latter. The spirit of religion 
is in the background, while its forms assume great importance. 
The need for prayer-books is felt. Liturgy is developed. 
The hymns are taken out of the Rg-Veda and arranged to 
suit sacrificial necessities. The priest becomes the lord. 
The Yajur-Veda gives the special formulas to be uttered 
when the altar is to be erected, etc., and the Saman describes 
the songs to be chanted at the sacrifice. These Vedas may 
be discussed along with the Brahmanas, since they all 
describe the sacrificial liturgy. The religion of the Yajur- 
Veda is a mechanical sacerdotalism. A crowd of priests 
conducts a vast and complicated system of external cere- 
monies to which symbolical significance is attached and to 
the smallest minutiae of which the greatest weight is given. 
The truly religious spirit could not survive in the stifling 
atmosphere of ritual and sacrifice. The religious feeling of 
the adoration of the ideal and the consciousness of guilt 
is lacking. Every prayer is coupled with a particular rite 
and aims at securing some material advantage. The formulas 
of the Yajur-Veda are full of dreary repetitions of petty 
requests for the goods of life. We cannot draw a sharp 
distinction between the age of the hymns of the Rg-Veda 
and the other Vedas and the Brahmanas, since the 
tendencies which became predominant in the latter were 
also found in the hymns of the Rg-Veda. We can say 
with some degree of certainty that the mass of the hymns 
of the Rg-Veda belongs to an age earlier than that of the 
Brahmanas. 


VOL. i 


5 



124 


INDIAN PHILOSOPHY 


IV 

Theology 

The Brahmanas, which form the second part of the 
Vedas, are the ritual textbooks intended to guide the priests 
through the complicated details of sacrificial rites. The 
chief of them are the Aitareya and the Satapatha. Differ- 
ences of detail in interpretation led to the formation of 
several schools of the Brahmanas. The period is marked 
by important changes in the religious evolution, which 
have permanently affected its future history. The emphasis 
on sacrifice, the observance of caste and the asramas, the 
eternity of the Veda, the supremacy of the priest, all belong 
to this age. 

We may begin by noting the additions made to the Vedic 
pantheon during the period. Visnu rose in importance 
in the Yajur-Veda. The Satapatha Brahmana makes him 
the personification of sacrifice. 1 The name Narayana also 
occurs in it, though it is only in the Taittiriya Aranyaka that 
the two Narayana and Visnu are brought into relation. 
Soiva makes his appearance, and is referred to under different 
names in the Kausitaki Brahmana. 2 Rudra has now a benig- 
nant form and is called Girisa.3 The Prajapati of the Rg-Veda 
becomes the chief god and the creator of the world. 
Visvakarman is identified with him. 4 Monotheism is incul- 
cated. Agni is very important. Brahmanaspati, the lord 
of prayer, becomes the leader of hymns and the organiser 
of rites. Brahman in the Rg-Veda means a hymn or a 
prayer addressed to God. From the subjective force which 
helped the seer to compose a prayer, it came to mean the 
object prayed for. From being the cause of prayer, we 
may say it came to mean the power of sacrifice ; and since 
in the Brahmanas the whole universe is regarded as pro- 
duced from sacrifice. Brahman came to signify the creative 
principle of the world. 5 

1 v. 2. 3. 6; v. 4. 5. 1 ; xii. 4. 1. 4; xiv. 1. 1. 6. and 15. * vi. 1-9. 

J See Tait. Samhita, iv. 5. I ; Vajasaneyi Samhita, ix. 

4 §at. Brah., viii. 2. 1. 10; viii. 2. 3. 13. 

5 Theie are several passages where Brahman is used in this sense. 
“ Verily in the beginning this universe was the Brahman ; it created the 
gods ” (sat. Brah., xi. 2. 3. 1. See also x. 6. 3, and Chan. Up., iii. 14. 1). 



TRANSITION TO THE UPANISADS 125 

The religion of the Brahmanas was purely formal. The 
poetic fire and the heartiness of the Vedic hymns are no 
more. Prayer comes to mean the muttering of mantras, 
or the utterance of sacred formulas. Loud petitions were 
thought necessary to rouse God to action. The words became 
artificial sounds with occult powers. Nobody could under- 
stand the mystery of it all, except the priest who claimed for 
himself the dignity of a god on earth. The one ambition 
was to become immortal like the gods, who attained that 
status by performing sacrifices . 1 All are subject to the 
influence of sacrifices. Without them, the sun would not 
rise. We can depose Indra from his throne in heaven if 
we perform a hundred horse-sacrifices. The sacrifices please 
the gods and profit men. Through them the gods become 
the friends of men. The sacrifices were made as a rule 
for gaining earthly profits and not heavenly bliss. A rigid 
soul-deadening, commercialist creed based on a contractual 
motive took the place of the simple devout religion of the 
Vedas . 2 The sacrifices of the Vedic hymns were a super- 
fluous appendage of prayers indicative of true religion 
but now they occupy the central place. Every act done, 
every syllable uttered at the ceremony is important. The 
religion of the Brahmanas became loaded with symbolic 
subtleties, and was ultimately lost in a soulless mechanism 
of idle rites and pedantries of formalism. 

The increasing dominance of the idea of sacrifice helped 
to exalt the position of the priests. The rsi of the Vedic 
hymns, the inspired singer of truth, becomes now the possessor 
of a revealed scripture, the repeater of a magical formula. 
The simple occupational division of the Aryans into the 
three classes assumes during the period an hereditary char- 
acter. The highly elaborate nature of the sacrificial cere- 
monial demands special training for the priestly office. 
The patriarchal head of the family could no more conduct 
the complex and minute system of the sacrificial ceremony. 
Priesthood became a profession and an hereditary one. The 

1 Sat. Brah., iii. i. 4. 3 ; Aitareya Brah., ii. 1. 1. 

» “ He offers a sacrifice to the gods with the text : ' Do thou give to me 
and I will give to thee ; do thou bestow on me and I will bestow on thee 
(Vajasaneyi Samhita, iii. 50. See also Sat. Brah., ii. 5. 3. 19). 



126 


INDIAN PHILOSOPHY 


priests who possessed the Vedic lore became the accredited 
intermediaries between gods and men and the dispensers 
of the divine grace. The yajamana, or the man for whom 
the rite is performed, stands aside. He is a passive agent 
supplying men, money and munitions ; the priest does 
the rest for him. Selfishness, with its longing for power, 
prestige and enjoyment, pressed its way in and dimmed 
the lustre of the original ideal. Attempts were made to 
mislead the people about the value of the offerings. A 
monopoly of functions and offices was secured. The ground 
was consolidated by the development of an extravagant 
symbolism. Language was used as if it was given to us 
to hide our thoughts. Only the priests could know the 
hidden meaning of things. No wonder the priest claimed 
for himself a divine dignity. “ Verily there are two kinds 
of gods ; for the gods themselves assuredly are gods, and 
then the priests who have studied and teach Vedic lore are 
the human gods.” 1 

We have here and there priests who seriously declare 
that they can bring about the death of him who actively 
employs them, though they have the moral sense to know 
that such an act is forbidden. 2 Another circumstance which 
further strengthened the priestly class was the necessity 
for the preservation of the Vedas which the Aryans brought 
with them, and round which, as we shall see in the sequel, 
a halo of sanctity grew. The Brahmin class was entrusted 
with their preservation. If the Vedas are to survive, the 
Brahmin must be true to his vocation. He imposed on 
himself accordingly severe conditions. “ A Brahmin un- 
learned in holy writ is extinguished in an instant like dry 
grass on fire.” 3 A Brahmin should shun worldly honour 
as he should shun poison. As a brahmacarin or student, 
he must control his passions, wait on his preceptor and 
beg for his food ; as a householder he must avoid wealth, 
speak the truth, lead a virtuous life, and keep himself pure 
in mind and body. The Brahmins felt that they should be 
faithful to the charge committed to their keeping. We 
need not speak of the wonderful way in which they have 

* Sat. Brah., ii. 2. t. 6 ; ii. 4. 3. 14. 

* Tait. Samkita, i. 6. 10. 4, and Ait. Brah., ii. 21. 2. 


( Manu. 



TRANSITION TO THE UPANISADS 127 


preserved the Vedic tradition against all the dangerous 
accidents of history. Even to-day we can meet in the 
streets of Indian cities these walking treasure-houses of 
Vedic learning. Ihe rigid barriers of the later age are to 
be traced to historical accidents. In the age of the Brah- 
manas there was not much material distinction among the 
twice-born Aryans. They could all be educated in Vedic 
knowledge . 1 “ The sacrifice is like a ship sailing heaven- 
ward ; if there be a sinful priest in it that one priest would 
make it sink.” 2 So morality was not dismissed as altogether 
irrelevant. The Brahmin priests were neither wicked nor 
stupid. They had their own ideas of duty and righteousness 
which thej^ tried to preach to others. They were honest, 
upright men, who obeyed the rules, observed ceremonies 
and defended dogmas to the best of their ability. They 
had a sense of their calling and fulfilled it with zest and 
reverence. They framed elaborate codes of laws expressing 
their great love of learning and humanity. If they erred, 
it was because they were themselves fettered by a tradition. 
They were sincere souls whatever their hallucinations. 
They felt no shadow of doubt about the truth of their own 
orthodoxy. Their thought was paralysed by the conven- 
tions of the times. Yet no one would say that their pride 
in their own culture and civilisation was illegitimate at a 
time when the world around was steeped in barbarism and 
a thousand rude and tyrannous elements provoked them 
into this feeling. 

In the nature of things, a professional priesthood is 
always demoralising. But there is no reason to think that 
the Brahmin of India was more pompous and hypocritical 
than any other. As against the possible degeneration, 
protests were uttered by the true Brahmins, filled with the 
serene calm and the simple grandeur of the prophet soul 
even in that age. They raised a revolt against the ostenta- 
tion and hypocrisy of the selfish priest and blushed at the 

1 Maim says : " A twice-born man, a Brahmin, Ksatriya or Vaisya, 
unlearned in the Vedas, soon falls, even while living, to a condition of Sudra." 
In the Maliabharata we read : “ The order of Vanaprasthas, of sages who 
dwell in forests and live on fruits, roots and air, is prescribed for the three 
twice- born classes, the order of householders is prescribed for all.” 

• Sat. Brah , iv. 2 . 5. 10. 



128 INDIAN PHILOSOPHY 

corruption of a great ideal. In any estimate of the priest- 
hood it is to be remembered that the Brahmins take into 
account the duties to be performed by the householder. There 
were other stages of the Vanaprastha and the Sannyasa where 
ritual is not binding at all. The Brahmanical rule would 
not have lasted if it had been felt as tyrannical or coercive. 
It commanded the confidence of the thinking, since it only 
insisted that everybody should fulfil his social duties. 

In later philosophy we hear much of what is called the 
authoritativeness of the Vedas or Sabdapramana. The 
darsanas or systems of philosophy are distinguished into 
orthodox or heterodox according as they accept or repudiate 
the authority of the Veda. The Veda is looked upon as a 
divine revelation. Though the Hindu apologists of a later 
day offer ingenious interpretations in support of Vedic 
authority, still, so far as the Vedic seers are concerned, they 
mean by it the highest truth revealed to a pure mind. 
“ Blessed are the pure in heart for they shall see God,” 
The rsi of the Vedic hymns calls himself not so much 
the composer of the hymns as the seer of them. 1 It is seeing 
with the mind’s eye or intuitive seeing. The rsi has his 
eyes unblinded by the fumes of passion, and so can see the 
truth which is not evident to the senses. He only transmits 
the truth which he sees but does not make.- The Veda 
is called “ fsruti,” or the rhythm of the infinite heard by 
the soul. The words drsti and sruti, which are the Vedic 
expressions, point out how the Vedic knowledge is not a 
matter of logical demonstration, but an intuitive insight. 
The poet’s soul hears or has revealed to it the truth in its 
inspired condition, when the mind is lifted above the narrow 
plane of the discursive consciousness. According to the 
Vedic seers the contents of the hymns are inspired and 
revelatory only in this sense. It is not their intention to 
suggest anything miraculous or supernatural. They even 
speak of the hymns as their own compositions or creations. 
They compare their work as poets with that of the carpenter, 

1 The word " Veda ” is derived from the Aryan root “ vid,” which means 
'•‘seeing.” Cf. Vision (from Lalm video) ; Ideas (from Gnek eidos), wit. 

J “ All artistic creation,” says Beethoven, “ comes from God, and relates 
to man only in so far as it witnesses to the action of the divine within him.” 



TRANSITION TO THE UPANISADS 129 


the weaver, the rower, 1 * and give natural explanations of it. 
The hymns are shaped by the feelings of the human heart. 3 * * 
Sometimes they say they found the hymns. 3 They also 
attribute them to the exaltation consequent on the drink 
of Soma. 3 In a very humble spirit they hold the hymns 
to be God-given. 5 The idea of inspiration is not yet trans- 
formed into that of an infallible revelation. 

When we come to the Brahmanas we reach an age when 
the divine authority of the Vedas is accepted as a fact. 6 7 
The claim to divine revelation, and therefore eternal validity, 
is set up in this period. Its origin is easily intelligible. 
Writing was then unknown. There were neither printers 
nor publishers. The contents of the Vedas were transmitted 
by oral repetition through a succession of teachers. To 
ensure respect, some sanctity was attached to the Vedas. 
In the Rg-Veda Vak, or speech, was a goddess. And now they 
said from Vak the Vedas issued forth. Vak is the mother 
of the Vedas.7 In the Atharva-Veda the mantra is said 
to possess magical power. “ The Vedas issued like breath 
from the self-existent.” 8 The Vedas came to be regarded 
as divine revelation, communicated to the rsis, who 
were inspired men. Sabda, articulate sound, is considered 
eternal. The obvious effect of this view of the Vedas is that 
philosophy becomes scholastic. When the spoken word, 
real and alive, gets fixed in a rigid formula, its spirit expires. 
The authoritativeness of the Veda formulated so early in 
the history of Indian thought has affected the whole course 
of subsequent evolution. In later philosophy the tendency 

1 See Muir, Sanskrit Texts, vol. iii. 1 R.V., i. 117. 2 ; ii. 35. 2. 

3 x. 67. 1. 4 vi. 47. 3. 

5 i. 37. 4; iii. 18. 3. In the second chapter of Muir’s Sanskrit Texts 

(vol. iii. pp. 217-86) we have a collection of passages which clearly show 

that “ though some at least of the rsis appear to have imagined them- 
selves to be inspired by the gods in the expression of their religious emotion 
and ideas, they at the same time regarded the hymns as their own compo- 
sitions, or as (presumably) the eompositions of their forefathers, distinguish- 
ing between them as new and old and describing their own authorship in 
terms "which could only have been dictated by a consciousness of its reality/* 

6 See Aitareya Brahmana, vii. 9. 

7 Vedanam mata. Tait. Brah., ii. 8. 8. 5. Compare the opening of 
St. John's Gospel: "In the beginning was the Word.” 

8 Satapatha Brah., xi. 5. 81 5 ., and also the Puru?a Sukta. 



130 


INDIAN PHILOSOPHY 


developed to interpret the unsystematic and not always 
consistent texts of the earlier age in line with set opinions. 
When once the tradition is regarded as sacred and infallible 
it must be represented as expressing or implying what is 
considered to be the truth. This accounts for the fact that 
the same texts are adduced in support of varying tenets 
and principles, mutually contradictory and inconsistent. 
If fidelity to dogma and diversity of view should live together, 
it is possible only through absolute freedom of interpretation, 
and it is here that the Indian philosophers show their 
ingenuity. It is surprising that, in spite of the tradition, 
Indian thought kept itself singularly free for a long time 
from dogmatic philosophising. The Indian thinkers first 
arrive at a system of consistent doctrine and then look 
about for texts of an earlier age to support their position. 
They either force them into such support or ingeniously 
explain them away. There has been one good effect of this 
Vedic tradition. It has helped to keep philosophy real 
and living. Instead of indulging in empty disputations 
and talking metaphysics which has no bearing on life, 
the Indian thinkers had a fixed foundation to go upon, the 
religious insight of the highest seers as expressed in the 
Vedas. It gave them a hold on the central facts of life, and 
no philosophy could afford to discard it. 


V 

Theories of Creation 

With regard to the theories of creation, though the lead 
of the Rg-Veda is generally followed, there are some fanciful 
accounts also mentioned. After the Rg-Veda, the Taittiriya 
Brahmana says, “ formerly nothing existed, neither heaven 
nor atmosphere nor earth.” Desire is the seed of existence. 
Prajapati desires offspring and creates. "Verily in the 
beginning Prajapati alone existed here. He thought with 
himself, how can I be propagated ? He toiled and practised 
austerities. He created living beings.” 1 

* Sat. Brah., ii. 5. 1. 1-3. 



TRANSITION TO THE UPANISADS 131 


VI 

Ethics 

In fairness to the religion of the Brahmanas, it is to be 
said that we find frequent traces in them of high moral 
sense and exalted sentiment. The conception of man’s 
duty first arises here. Man is said to owe some debts or 
duties to gods, men and animals. The duties are distin- 
guished into (i) those to the gods, (2) those to seers, (3) those 
to manes, (4) those to men, (5) and those to the lower crea- 
tion. He who discharges them all is the good man. No 
man can touch his daily meal without offering parts of it 
to gods, fathers, men and animals, and saying his daily 
prayers. This is the way to live in harmony with the world 
around him. Life is a round of duties and responsibilities. 
The conception is certainly high and noble whatever the 
actual filling of the ideal may be. Unselfishness can be 
practised in all our acts. In the 5 atapatha Brahmana, the 
sacrifice of all things, sarvamedha, is taught as a means to 
the attainment of spiritual freedom. 1 Godliness is of course 
the first duty. It does not consist in the mechanical perform- 
ance of fixed ritual. It consists in praise and good works. 
Godliness means trying to be divine as much as possible. 
Truth-speaking is an essential part of godliness. It is a 
religious and moral duty. Agni is the lord of vows and Vak 
the lord of speech. Both will be displeased if truthfulness is 
not observed. 2 We notice already the symbolical interpre- 
tation of sacrifices. There are passages which point to the 
essential futility of works. “ Yonder world cannot be 
obtained by sacrificial gifts or by asceticism by the man 
who does not know this. That state belongs only to him 
who has this knowledge.” 3 Adultery is condemned as 
a sin against the gods, especially Varuna. In all cases of 
evil-doing, confession is supposed to make the guilt less .4 
Asceticism is also held up as a worthy ideal, for the 

1 xiii. 7. 1. 1. 

* “ One law the gods observe — Truth." Sat. Brah., i. I. I. 4. ; see also 
i. 1. i. 5 ; iii. 3. 2. 2, and iii. 4. 2. 8, and ii. 2. 2. 19 - 

3 Sat. Brah., x. 5. 4. 15. * Sat. Brah., ii. 5. 2. 20 


VOL. I 


5* 



132 INDIAN PHILOSOPHY 

gods are supposed to have obtained divine rank by 
austerity. 1 

The asrama dharma was introduced or more correctly 
formulated in this age. 2 The Vedic Aryan’s life has the 
four stages or asramas, as they are called, of (i) Brahmacarin 
or student, when he is expected to study one or more Vedas; 

(2) the Grhastha or the householder, when he has to fulfil 
the duties mentioned in the scriptures, social and sacrificial; 

(3) the Vanaprastha or the hermit, when the devotee spends 
his time in fasting and penance; and (4) the Sannyasin 
or the ascetic, who has no fixed abode. He is without any 
possessions or property and longs for union with God. The 
four parts of the Veda, the hymns, the Brahmanas, the Aran- 
yakas and the Upanisads answer to the four stages of the 
Vedic Aryan’s life . 3 Beneath the formalism of ceremonial 
worship there was at work a spirit of true religion and morality, 
from which the heart of man obtained satisfaction. It 
is this ethical basis which has helped the Brahmanical 
religion with all its weaknesses to endure so long. Side 
by side with its insistence on the outer, there was also the 
emphasis on inner purity. Truth, godliness, honour to 
parents, kindness to animals, love of man, abstinence from 
theft, murder and adultery, were inculcated as the essentials 
of a good life. 

The institution of caste is not the invention of an un- 
scrupulous priesthood, but a natural evolution conditioned 
by the times. It was consolidated in the period of the 
Brahmanas. The Purusa Sukta, though a part of the 
Rg-Veda, really belongs to the age of the Brahmanas. It is 
clear that there were then inter-marriages between the 
Aryans and the Dasyus.t To avoid too much confusion of 
blood, an appeal was made to the pride of the Aryans. 
What was originally a social institution became a religious 
one. A divine sanction was given to it, and the laws of 

* Tait. Brah., iii. 12. 3. 

» The word asrama, derived from a root meaning" to toil," shows that 
the Indians realised that suffering was incidental to all progress. 

3 The account of these stages varies with the authorities. See Brh., 
Up., iii. 5. 1; Apastamba Sutras, ii. 9. 21. 1 ; Gautama Sutras, iii. 2; Bodha- 
3-ana, ii. 6. 11. 12; Manu., v. 137, vi. 87; Vasi^tha, vii. 2. 

« A V„ v. 17. 8. 



TRANSITION TO THE UPANISADS 133 


caste became immutable. The flexibility of the original 
class system gave way to the rigidity of the caste. In the 
early Vedic period the priests formed a separate profession, 
but not a separate caste. Any Aryan could become a 
priest, and the priestly class was not necessarily superior 
to the warrior or the trading classes. Sometimes they were 
even treated with contempt. 1 But now the exclusiveness 
born of pride becomes the basis of caste. It tended to 
suppress free thought and retarded the progress of specula- 
tion. The moral standard sank. The individual who 
transgressed the rules of caste was a rebel and an outcaste. 
The Sudras were excluded from the highest religion. Mutual 
contempt increased. “ These are the words of Ksatriya,” 
is a typical Brahmin way of characterising the words of 
an opponent. 2 


VII 

Eschatology 

In the Brahmanas we do not find any one view about 
the future life. The distinction between the path of the 
fathers and that of the devas is given. 3 Rebirth on earth 
is sometimes looked upon as a blessing and not an evil to 
be escaped from. It is promised as a reward for knowing 
some divine mystery. 4 But the most dominant view is 
that of immortality in heaven, the abode of the gods. 
" He who sacrifices thus obtains perpetual prosperity and 
renown and conquers for himself a union with the two 
gods Aditya and Agni and an abode in the same sphere.” 5 
Particular sacrifices enable us to reach the spheres of par- 
ticular gods. 6 Even the stars are regarded as the abode of 
the dead. It is individual existence, though in a better 
world, that is the aim still. “ In the Brahmanas immortality, 
or at least longevity, is promised to those who rightly under- 
stand and practise the rites of sacrifice, while those who are 
deficient in this respect depart before time to the next world, 

i See R.V., vii. 103. 1. 7 and 8; x. 88. 19. 

• Sat. Brah., viii. 1. 4. 10. 8 Ibid., vi. 6. 2. 4. 

« Ibid., i. 5. 3.1 4. » Ibid., xi. 6. 2. 5. 

‘ Ibid., ii. 6. 4. 8. 



134 INDIAN PHILOSOPHY 

where they are weighed in a balance, 1 and receive good and 
evil according to their deeds. The more sacrifices any one 
has offered, the more ethereal is the body he obtains, or as 
the Brahmana expresses it, 2 the more rarely does he need 
to eat. j.n other texts, on the contrary,3 it is promised as the 
highest reward that the pious man shall be born in the next 
world, with his entire body, sarva tanuh.” 1 Thus far the 
difference between the Vedic and the Brahmanical views 
is that while according to the Rg-Veda the sinner is reduced 
to nothing while the virtuous obtain immortality, in the 
Brahmanas both are born again to undergo the results of their 
actions. As Weber puts it : “ Whereas in the oldest times 
immortality in the abodes of the blessed, where milk and 
honey flow, is regarded as the reward of virtue or wisdom, 
whilst the sinner or the fool is, after a short life, doomed 
to the annihilation of the personal existence, the doctrine 
of the Brahmanas is that after death all are born again, 
in the next world, where they are recompensed according 
to their deeds, the good being rewarded and the wicked 
punished.” 5 The suggestion is that there is only one life 
after this, and its nature is determined by our conduct here. 
“ A man is born into the world which he has made.” 6 
" Whatever food a man eats in this w’orld by that food he 
is eaten in the next world.” 7 Good and evil deeds find their 
corresponding rewards and punishments in a future life. 
Again: " Thus have they done to us in yonder world, and 
so we do to them again in this world.” 8 Gradually the idea 
of an equalising justice developed. The world of the 
fathers, as in the Rg-Veda, was one of the ways, but the 
distinction arose between the Vedic gods and their world 
and the way of the fathers and their world of retributive 
justice. We have not yet the idea of a recurrence of births 
in the other world and expiations for actions done on earth. 
But the question cannot be avoided whether the wicked suffer 
eternal punishment and the good enjoy eternal bliss. “ To 

> xi. 2. 7 . 33 . • x , j. 5 . 4 . 

3 iv. 6. i. i ; xi. i. 8. 6; xii. 8. 3. 31. 

« Weber quoted in J.R.A.S., i. 1865, 306 5 . 5 Ibid. 

4 Sat. Brah., vi. 2. 2. 27. Krtam lokaiii puruso'bhiyayate. 

7 Sat. Brah., xii. 9. 11. I § a t. Brah., ii. 6. 



TRANSITION TO THE UPANISADS 135 

men of the mild disposition and reflective spirit of the Indians 
it would not appear that reward and punishment could be 
eternal. They would conceive that it must be possible by 
atonement and purification to become absolved from the 
punishment of the sins committed in this short life. And 
in the same way they could not imagine that the reward of 
virtues practised during the same brief period could continue 
for ever.” When we finish experiencing our rewards and 
punishments, it is suggested that we die to that life and 
are reborn on earth. The natural rhythm by which life 
gives birth to death and death to life leads us to the con- 
ception of a beginningless and endless circuit. 1 The true 
ideal becomes redemption from the bondage of life and death 
or release from samsara. “ He who sacrifices to the gods 
does not gain so great a world as he who sacrifices to the 
Atman.” 2 “ He who reads the Vedas is freed from dying 

again and attains to a sameness of nature with Brahman.” 3 
Death with birth for its cause seems to have become a 
thing to be avoided. Later we find the conception that 
those who merely perform rites without knowledge are born 
again and repeatedly become the food of death. 4 In another 
passage 5 there is suggested the Upanisad conception of 
a higher state than that of desire and its fulfilment, the 
condition of true immortality. “ This soul is the end of 
all this. It abides in the midst of all the waters ; it is 
supplied with all objects of desire ; it is free from desire, and 
possesses all objects of desire, for it desires nothing.” “ By 
knowledge men ascend to that condition in which desires 
have passed away. Thither gifts do not reach nor austere 
devotees who are destitute of knowledge. For one who 
does not possess this knowledge does not attain that world 
by gifts or by rigorous abstention. It pertains only to those 
who have such knowledge.” 6 The Brahmanas contain all 
the suggestions necessary for the development of the doctrine 
of rebirth. They are, however, only suggestions, while 

1 See Aitareya Brail., iii. 44. * xi. 2. 6. 3 x. 5. 6. 9. 

4 Sat. Brah., x. 4. 3. 10. See also x. 1. 4. 14; x. 2. 6. 19; x. 5. 1. 4; 
xi. 4. 3. 20. 

5 x. 5. 4. 15. 

6 Samkara refers to this passage in his Commentary on the Vedanta 
Sutras to show how near to his own view this position is. 



136 INDIAN PHILOSOPHY 

individual immortality is the main tendency. It is left 
for the Upanisads to systematise these suggestions into 
the doctrine of rebirth. While the conceptions of karma 
and rebirth are unquestionably the work of the Aryan 
mind, it need not be denied that the suggestions may have 
come from the aborigines, who believed that after death their 
souls lived in animal bodies. 

In spite of suggestions of a higher ethics and religion, it 
must be said that the age was, on the whole, one of Pharisaism, 
in which people were more anxious about the completion of 
their sacrifices than the perfection of their souls. There 
was need for a restatement of the spiritual experience, the 
central meaning of which was obscured by a legalistic code 
and conventional piety. This the Upanisads undertake. 

REFERENCES. 

Bloomfield : The Atharva-Veda, S.B.E., vol. xliii. 

Eggeling : Satapatha Brahmana, S.B.E., vol. xii., Introduction. 

Hopkins : The Religions of India, chap. ix. 



CHAPTER IV 


THE PHILOSOPHY OF THE UPANISADS 


Introduction — The fluid and indefinite character of the teaching of 
the Upanisads — Western students of the Upanisads — Date — Early 
Upanisads — The great thinkers of the age — The hymns of the Rg- 
Veda and the doctrine of the Upanisads compared — Emphasis on 
the monistic side of the hymns — The shifting of the centre from the 
object to the subject — The pessimism of the Upanisads — The pessi- 
mistic implications of the conception of samsara — Protest against 
the externalism of the Vedic religion — Subordination of the Vedic 
knowledge — The central problems of the Upanisads — Ultimate 
reality — The nature of Atman distinguished from body, dream con- 
sciousness and empirical self — The different modes of consciousness, 
waking, dreaming, dreamless sleep and ecstasy — The influence of 
the Upanisad analysis of self on subsequent thought — The approach 
to reality from the object side — Matter, life, consciousness, in- 
telligence and ananda — Sarhkaxa and Ramanuja on the status of 
ananda — Brahman and Atman — Tat tvam asi — The positive char- 
acter of Brahman — Intellect and intuition — Brahman and the world 
— Creation — The doctrine of maya — Deussen’s view examined — 
Degrees of reality — Are the Upanisads pantheistic ? — The finite 
self — The ethics of the Upanisads — The nature of the ideal — The 
metaphysical warrant for an ethical theory — Moral life — Its general 
features — Asceticism — Intellectualism — J.'ana, Karma and Upasana 
— Morality and religion — Beyond good and evil — The religion of the 
Upanisads — Different forms — The highest state of freedom — The 
ambiguous accounts of it in the Upanisads — Evil — Suffering — 
Karma — Its value — The problem of freedom — Future life and immor- 
tality — Psychology of the Upanisads — Non-Vedantic tendencies in 
the Upanisads — Sarhkhva — Yoga — Nyaya — General estimate of the 
thought of the Upanisads — Transition to the epic period. 

I 

The Upanisads 

The Upanisads 1 form tlie concluding portions of the 
Veda, and are therefore called the Veda-anta, or the end 

1 The word Upanisad comes from upa ni sad, " sitting down near.” It means 
“ sitting down near ” the teacher to receive instruction. It gradually came to 

137 



138 INDIAN PHILOSOPHY 

of the Veda, a denomination which suggests that they 
contain the essence of the Vedic teaching. They are the 
foundations on which most of the later philosophies and 
religions of India rest. “ There is no important form of 
Hindu thought, heterodox Buddhism included, which is 
not rooted in the Upanisads.” 1 Later systems of philo- 
sophy display an almost pathetic anxiety to accommodate 
their doctrines to the views of the Upanisads, even if 
they cannot father them all on them. Every revival of 
idealism in India has traced its ancestry to the teaching 
of the Upanisads. Their poetry and lofty idealism have 
not as yet lost their power to move the minds and sway 
the hearts of men. They contain the earliest records of 
Indian speculation. The hymns and the liturgical books 
of the Veda are concerned more with the religion and prac- 
tice than with the thought of the Aryans. We find in the 
Upanisads an advance on the Saiiihita mythology, Brahmana 
hair-splitting, and even Aranyaka theology, though all these 
stages are to be met with. The authors of the Upanisads 
transform the past they handle, and the changes they effect 
in the Vedic religion indicate the boldness of the heart that 
beats only for freedom. The aim of the Upanisads is 
not so much to reach philosophical truth as to bring peace 
and freedom to the anxious human spirit. Tentative solu- 
tions of metaphysical questions are put forth in the form 
of dialogues and disputations, though the Upanisads are 
essentially the outpourings or poetic deliverances of philo- 
sophically tempered minds in the face of the facts of life. 
They express the restlessness and striving of the human 
mind to grasp the true nature of reality. Not being sys- 
tematic philosophy, or the production of a single author, 
or even of the same age, they contain much that is incon- 


mean what we receive from the teacher, a sort of secret doctrine or rahasyam. 
Sometimes it is made to mean what enables us to destroy error, and approach 
truth. £amkara, in his introduction to the Taittiriya Upanisad, says: 
" Knowledge of Brahman is called Upanisad because in the case of those 
who devote themselves to it, the bonds of conception, birth, decay, etc., 
become unloosed, or because it destroys them altogether, or because it leads 
the pupil very near to Brahman, or because therein the highest God is 
seated.” See Pandit, March, 1872, p. 254. 

« Bloomfield : The Religion of the Veda, p. 51, 



PHILOSOPHY OF THE UPANISADS 139 


sistent and unscientific; but if that were all, we cannot 
justify the study of the Upanisads. They set forth funda- 
mental conceptions which are sound and satisfactory, and 
these constitute the means by which their own innocent 
errors, which through exclusive emphasis have been exag- 
gerated into fallacious philosophies, can be corrected. Not- 
withstanding the variety of authorship and the period of 
time covered by the composition of these half-poetical and 
half-philosophical treatises, there is a unity of purpose, 
a vivid sense of spiritual reality in them all, which become 
clear and distinct as we descend the stream of time. 
They reveal to us the wealth of the reflective religious mind 
of the times. In the domain of intuitive philosophy their 
achievement is a considerable one. Nothing that went 
before them for compass and power, for suggestiveness 
and satisfaction, can stand comparison with them. Their 
philosophy and religion have satisfied some of the greatest 
thinkers and intensely spiritual souls. We do not agree 
with Gough’s estimate that “ there is little that is spiritual 
in all this,” or that " this empty intellectual conception, 
void of spirituality, is the highest form that the Indian 
mind is capable of.” Professor J. S. Mackenzie, with truer 
insight, says that “ the earliest attempt at a constructive 
theory of the cosmos, and certainly one of the most inter- 
esting and remarkable, is that which is set forth in the 
Upanisads.” 1 


II 

The Teaching of the Upanisads 

It is not easy to decide what the Upanisads teach. 
Modern students of the Upanisads read them in the light 
of this or that preconceived theory. Men are so little 
accustomed to trust their own judgment that they take 
refuge in authority and tradition. Though these are safe 
enough guides for conduct and life, truth requires insight 
and judgment as well. A large mass of opinion inclines 
to-day to the view of Sarhkara, who in his commentaries 

I E.R.E., vol. viii., p. 597 ; see also Hume, The Thirteen Principal 
Upanisads, p. 2. 



140 INDIAN PHILOSOPHY 

on the Upanisads, the Bhagavadgita and the Vedanta 
Sutras, has elaborated a highly subtle system of non-dualistic 
metaphysics. Another is equally vehement that Jsamkara 
has not said the last word on the subject, and that a philo- 
sophy of love and devotion is the logical outcome of the 
teaching of the Upanisads. Different commentators, start- 
ing with particular beliefs, force their views into the Upani- 
sads and strain their language so as to make it consistent 
with their own special doctrines. When disputes arise, 
all schools turn to the Upanisads. Thanks to the obscurity 
as well as the richness, the mystic haze as well as the sug- 
gestive quality of the Upanisads, the interpreters have been 
able to use them in the interests of their own religion and 
philosophy. The upanisads had no set theory of philosophy 
or dogmatic scheme of theology to propound. They hint 
at the truth in life, but not as yet in science or philosophy. 
So numerous are their suggestions of truth, so various are 
their guesses at God, that almost anybody may seek in 
them what he wants and find what he seeks, and every 
school of dogmatics may congratulate itself on finding its 
own doctrine in the sayings of the Upanisads. In the 
history of thought it has often happened that a philosophy 
has been victimised by a traditional interpretation that 
became established at an early date, and has thereafter 
prevented critics and commentators from placing it in its 
proper perspective. The system of the Upanisads has 
not escaped this fate. The Western interpreters have followed 
this or that commentator. Gough follows Samkara’s inter- 
pretation. In his Preface to the Philosophy of the Upanisads 
he writes : “ The greatest expositor of the philosophy of 
the Upanisads is Samkara or ^amkaracarya. The teaching 
of Samkara himself is the natural and the legitimate inter- 
pretation of the philosophy of the Upanisads." 1 Max 
Muller adopts the same standpoint. " We must remember 
that the orthodox view of the Vedanta is not what we 
should call evolution, but illusion. Evolution of the Brahman 
or parinama is heterodox, illusion or vivarta is orthodox 
Vedanta. ... To put it metaphorically, the world according 
to the orthodox Vedantin does not proceed from Brahman 

* P. viii. 



PHILOSOPHY OF THE UPANISADS 141 


as a tree from a germ, but as a mirage from the rays of 
the sun.” 1 Deussen accepts the same view. We shall try 
to ascertain the meaning which the authors of the Upanisads 
intended, and not what later commentators attributed to 
them. The latter give us an approximately close idea of 
how the Upanisads were interpreted in later times, but 
not necessarily a true insight into the philosophic synthesis 
which the ancient seekers had. But the problem is, do 
the thoughts of the Upanisads hang together ? Could 
all of them be traced to certain commonly acknowledged 
principles about the general make-up of the world ? We 
are not so bold as to answer this question in the affirmative. 
These writings contain too many hidden ideas, too many 
possible meanings, too rich a mine of fancies and conj ectures, 
that we can easily understand how different systems can 
draw their inspiration from the same source. The Upanisads 
do not contain any philosophic synthesis as such, of the 
type of the system of Aristotle or of Kant or of Samkara. 
They have the consistency of intuition rather than of logic, 
and there are certain fundamental ideas which, so to say, 
form the first sketch of a philosophic system. Out of these 
ideas a coherent and consistent doctrine might be developed. 
It is, however, difficult to be confident that one’s working 
up of elements which knew neither method nor arrangement 
is the correct one, on account of the obscurity of many 
passages. Yet with the higher ideals of philosophic expo- 
sition in view, we shall consider the Upanisad ideas of 
the universe and of man’s place in it. 

Ill 

Number and Date of the Upanisads 
The Upanisads are generally accounted to be 108 in 
number, of which about ten are the chief, on which Samkara 
has commented. These are the oldest and the most authori- 
tative. We cannot assign any exact date to them. The 
earliest of them are certainly pre-Buddhistic, a few of them are 
after Buddha. It is likely that they were composed between 
the completion of the Vedic hymns and the rise of Buddhism 
(that is the sixth century b.c.) The accepted dates 
« S.B.E., vol. xv., p. xxvii. 



142 INDIAN PHILOSOPHY 

for the early Upanisads are 1000 b.c. to 300 b.c. Some 
of the later Upanisads on which Samkara has commented 
are post-Buddhistic, and belong to about 400 or 300 B.c. 
The oldest Upanisads are those in prose. These are non- 
sectarian. The Aitareya, the Kausitaki, the Taittirfya, 
the Chandogya, the Brhadaranyaka, and parts of the 
Kena are the early ones, while verses 1-13 of the Kena, 
and iv. 8-21 of the Brhadaranyaka form the transition 
to the metrical Upanisads, and may be put down as 
later additions. The Kathopanisad is later still. We find 
in it elements of the Samkhya and the Yoga systems. 1 
It also quotes freely from the other Upanisads and 
the Bhagavadgita. 2 The Mandukya is the latest of the 
pre-sectarian Upanisads. The Atharva-Veda Upanisads 
are also of later growth. MaitrayanI Upanisad has 

elements in it of both the Samkhya and the Yoga systems. 
The Svetasvatara was composed at the period when the 
several philosophical theories were fermenting. It shows in 
many passages an acquaintance with the technical terms 
of the orthodox systems and mentions many of their pro- 
minent doctrines. It seems to be interested in presenting 
a theistic syncretism of the Vedanta, the Samkhya and the 
Yoga. There is more of pure speculation present in the 
early prose Upanisads, while in the later ones there is 
more of religious worship and devotion .3 In presenting 

1 See ii. 18-19 ; ii. 6. 10 and 11. 

3 See i. 2. 5 ; and Mundaka, ii. 8 ; i. 3-7, and Gita, ii. 29 ; ii. 18-19, and 
ii. 19-20 and ii. 23, and Mundaka, iii. 2-3, Gita, i. 53. Some scholars are 
inclined to the view that the Katha upanisad is older than the Mundaka and 
the Gita. 

3 Deussen arranges the Upanisads in the following order : — 

1. Ancient prose Upanisads : Brhadaranyaka, Chandogya, Tait- 

tiriya, Aitareya, Kausitaki, Kena (partly in prose). 

2. Verse Upanisads ; Isa, Katha, Mundaka and Svetasvatara. 

3. Later prose : Prasna and MaitrayanI. 

All these, excepting the MaitrayanI, are called the classical Upanisads. 

About the MaitrayanI, Professor Macdonell writes : “ Its many quota- 
tions from the other Upanisads, the occurrence of several later words, the 
developed Samkhya doctrine presupposed by it, distinct references to the 
anti-Yedic heretical schools, all combine to render the late character of this 
work undoubted. It is, in fact, a summing up of the old upanisadic doc- 
trines with an admixture of ideas derived from the Samkhya system and 
from Buddhism” (Sanskrit Literature, p. 230). 

Nrsmhottaratapanlya is one of the twelve Upanisads explained by 
Vidyaranya in his “ Sarvopanisadarthanubhutipraka<a." 



PHILOSOPHY OF THE UPANISADS 143 


the philosophy of the Upanisads, we shall take our stand 
mainly on the pre-Buddhistic ones, and strengthen our 
views as derived from them by those of the post-Buddhistic 
ones. The main Upanisads for our purposes are the 
Chandogya and the Brhadaranyaka, the Taittiriya and 
the Aitareya, the Kausltaki and the Kena ; the Isa and 
the Mandukya come next. 


IV 

The Thinkers of the Upanisads 

Unfortunately, we know very little of the lives of the 
great thinkers whose reflections are embodied in the Upani- 
sads. So careless were they of personal fame and so 
anxious for the spread of truth, that they fathered their 
views on the honoured deities and heroes of the Vedic 
period. Prajapati and Indra, Narada and Sanatkumara 
figure as dialecticians. When the history of the great 
thinkers of the Upanisad period with their distinctive 
contributions comes to be written, the following names, 
if we leave aside the mythical ones, will stand out : Mahidasa 
Aitareya, Raikva, Sandilya, Satyakama Jabala, Jaivali, 
Uddalaka, Svetaketu, Bharadvaja, Gargyayana, Pratar- 
dana, Balaki, Ajatasatru, Varuna, Yajnavalkya, Gargi and 
Maitreyi. 1 


V 

The Hymns of the Rg-Veda and the Upanisads 

In view of the distinctive character of their contents, 
the Upanisads are regarded as a class of literature inde- 
pendent of the Vedic hymns and the Brahmanas. The 
simple faith in gods of the hymns was, as we saw, displaced 
by the mechanical sacerdotalism of the Brahmanas. The 
Upanisads feel that the faith that ends in a church is not 
enough. They attempt to moralise the religion of the 

1 The interested reader will find a lucid account of these thinkers and 
their views in the excellent work of my friend and colleague, Dr. Barua, 
Pre-Buddhistic Indian Philosophy. 



144 INDIAN PHILOSOPHY 

Vedas without disturbing its form. The advance of the 
Upanisads on the Vedas consists in an increased emphasis 
on the monistic suggestions of the Vedic hymns, a shifting 
of the centre from the outer to the inner world, a protest 
against the externalism of the Vedic practices and an in- 
difference to the sacredness of the Veda. 

Asiid all the confused ferment of Vedic devotions a 
certain principle of unity and comprehension was asserting 
itself. In some hymns the conception of a single central 
power was actually formulated. The Upanisads carry out 
this tendency. They recognise only one spirit — almighty, 
infinite, eternal, incomprehensible, self-existent, the creator, 
preserver and destroyer of the world. He is the light, 
lord and life of the universe, one without a second, and 
the sole object of worship and adoration. The half -gods 
of the Veda die and the true God arrives. “ How many 
gods are there really, O Yajnavalkya ? ” “ One,” he said. 1 * 

“ Now answer us a further question : Agni, Vayu, Aditya, 
Kala (time), which is breath (Prana), Anna (food), Brahma, 
Rudra, Visnu. Thus do some meditate on him, some on 
another. Say which of these is the best for us ? ” And 
he said to them : “ These are but the chief manifestations 
of the highest, the immortal, the incorporeal Brahman. . . . 
Brahman, indeed, is all this, and a man may meditate on, 
worship or discard also those which are its manifestations.” 3 
The visible infinite (objective) and the invisible infinite 
(subjective) are taken up into the spiritual whole. 

The polytheistic conceptions were too deeply rooted in 
the Indian consciousness to be easily overthrown. The 
many gods were subordinated to the One. Without Brah- 
man, Agni cannot burn a blade of grass, Vayu cannot blow 
a whisp of straw. “ For fear of him, fire burns, for fear 
of him the sun shines, and for fear of him the winds, the 
clouds and death perform their office.” 3 Sometimes the 
many gods are made parts of one whole. The five house- 
holders led by Uddalaka approach king Asvapati, who 

1 Brh. Up., iii. 9- i. 

’ Maitrayanl Upanisad, iv. 5-6; see also Muiidaka, i. I. r ; Taittiriya, 
i. 5 ; Brh., i. 4. 6 ; see also i. 4. 7 ; i. 4. 10. 

3 Tait. Up. 



PHILOSOPHY OF THE UPANISADS 145 


asked each of them, Whom do you meditate on as the 
Self ? The first answered heaven ; the second, the sun ; 
the third, air ; the fourth, ether ; the fifth, water ; and 
the king replies that each of them worshipped only a part 
of the truth. Heaven is the head, the sun the eye, the 
air the breath, the ether the trunk, the water the bladder, 
and the earth the feet of the central reality, which is pictured 
as the world-soul. Compromise between the philosophic 
faith of the few and the fancied superstition of the crowds 
is the only possible reconciliation ; we cannot abolish the 
old forms, for that would be to ignore the fundamental 
nature of humanity, as well as the patent differences, in 
the moral and intellectual states of believers who were not 
capable of acquiring at once the highest wisdom. Another 
factor also determined the attitude of the Upanisads. Their 
aim was not science or philosophy, but right living. They 
wished to liberate the spirit from the trammels of the flesh, 
that it might enjoy communion with God. Intellectual 
discipline was subsidiary to holiness of life. Besides, there 
was the feeling of reverence for the past. The Vedic seers 
were the ancients of blessed memory, whose doctrines it 
was impious to attack. In this w'ay the Upanisads sought 
to square a growing idealistic philosophy with the dogmas 
of a settled theology. 

The sources of man’s spiritual insight are two-fold : 
objective and subjective — the w'onders of the world without 
and the stress of the human soul. In the Vedas the vast 
order and movement of nature engages attention. Their gods 
represent cosmic forces. In the Upanisads we return to 
explore the depths of the inner world. “ The self-existent 
pierced the openings of the senses so that they turn outwards ; 
therefore man looks outward, not inward into himself ; 
some wise man, however, with his eyes closed and wishing 
for immortality, saw' the self behind.” 1 From the outward 
physical fact, attention shifts to the inner immortal self 
situated at the back of the mind, as it w r ere. We need 
not look to the sky for the bright light ; the glorious fire 
is within the soul. The soul of man is the keyhole 
to the landscape of the whole universe, the Akasa within 

* Katha Up., iv. i. 



146 


INDIAN PHILOSOPHY 


the heart, the limpid lake which mirrors the truth. The 
altered outlook brought about a consequential change. 
Not the so-called gods, but the true living God, the Atman 
has to be worshipped. God’s dwelling-place is the heart 
of man. “ Brahmanah koso’si,” 1 Thou art the sheath of 
Brahman. “ Whosoever worships another deity, in such a 
manner as he is another, another ‘ I am,’ does not know.” * 
The inner immortal self and the great cosmic power are 
one and the same. Brahman is the Atman and the Atman 
is the Brahman. The one supreme power through which 
all things have been brought into being is one with the 
inmost self in each man’s heart. 3 The Upanisads do not 
uphold the theory of grace in the same spirit as the Vedas 
do. We do not have appeals to the Vedic gods, who were 
the sources of material prosperity for increase of happiness, 
but only prayers for deliverance from sorrow. 

The emphasis on sorrow is sometimes interpreted as 
indicating an extravagant pessimism on the part of the 
Indian rsis. It is not so. The religion of the Vedas 
certainly was more joyous, but it was a lower form of religion, 
where thought never penetrated beneath the husk of things. 
It was a religion expressing the delight of man at being 
in a world full of pleasures. The gods were feared and also 
trusted. Life on earth was simple and sweet innocence. 
The spiritual longing of the soul rebukes light-hearted 
joyousness and provokes reflection on the purpose of man’s 
existence. Discontent with the actual is the necessary 
precondition of every moral change and spiritual rebirth. 
The pessimism of the Upanisads is the condition of all 
philosophy. Discontent prevails to enable man to effect 

« Tait. Up. * Brh. Up., i. 4, 10. 

S See Chandogya, iii. 14. Cf. Augustine: “ I asked the earth for God, 
and it answered me, ‘ I am not He ’ ; I asked the sea and the depths and 
the creeping things, and they answered, ' We are not the God, seek thou 
above us.' I asked the breezy gales, and the airy universe, and all its 
denizens replied, ‘ Anaximenes is mistaken, I am not God ' ; I asked the 
heaven, sun, moon, stars, ‘ Neither are we,’ say they, ‘ the God whom thou 
seekest ’ ; and I asked unto all things which stand about the gateways of 
my flesh (the senses), ‘ Ye have told me of my God, that ye are not He; tell 
me something of Him,’ and they cried with a loud voice, ‘ He made us.' ” 
The search goes on until the inward self is questioned, when the answer is : 
“ Thy God is unto Lhee, even the life of thy life ” ( Confessions , x. chap. 6). 



PHILOSOPHY OF THE UPANISADS 147 


an escape from it. If there is no way of escape, if no deliver- 
ance is sought after, then dissatisfaction is mischievous. 
The pessimism of the Upanisads has not developed to 
such an extent as to suppress all endeavour and generate 
inertia. There was enough faith in life to support all 
genuine search for truth. In the words of Barth : “ The 
Upanisads are much more instinct with the spirit of specu- 
lative daring than the sense of suffering and weariness.” 1 
" Within the limits of the Upanisads there are indeed 
few explicit references to the misery of the life caught in 
the ceaseless cycle of death and birth. And its authors 
are saved from pessimism by the joy they feel at the message 
of redemption they proclaim.” 2 The formulation of the 
theory of samsara or rebirth is no proof that the Upanisads 
are pessimistic. Life on earth is the means of self-perfection. 
We have to undergo the discipline of samsara in our efforts 
towards the higher joy and the complete possession of 
spiritual truth. That which gives zest to life is the supreme 
motive of the joy of self-conquest. Samsara is only a 
succession of spiritual opportunities. Life is a stage in 
spiritual perfection, a step in the passage to the infinite. 
It is the time for preparing the soul for eternity. Life is 
no empty dream and the world no delirium of spirit. In 
the later versions of rebirth in Indian thought we miss 
this ennobling ideal, and birth becomes the result of an 
error of the soul and sariisara a dragging chain. 

At the stage of life represented by the Brahmanas, the 
simple religion of the Vedic hymns was one of sacrifices. 
Men’s relations with the gods were mechanical, a question 
of give and take, profit and loss. The revival of spirituality 
was the need of the age immersed in formalism. In the 
Upanisads we find a return to the fresh springs of 
spiritual life. They declare that the soul will not obtain 
salvation by the performance of sacrifices. It can be ob- 
tained only by the truly religious life, based on an insight into 
the heart of the universe. Perfection is inward and spiritual, 
not outward and mechanical. We cannot make a man 
clean by washing his shirt. A consciousness of the identity 

1 Religions of India, p. 84. 

• Cave: Redemption , Hindu and Chiistian, p. 64. 



148 INDIAN PHILOSOPHY 

of one’s own soul with the great All-soul is the essence of 
a truly spiritual life. The uselessness of ritual, the futility 
of sacrifices as means to salvation are brought out. God 
is to be honoured by spiritual worship and not external 
ceremony. We cannot save ourselves by praising God. 
We cannot impress Him by sacrifices. The authors 
of the Upanisads had a sufficient sense of the historic 
to know that their protest would become ineffective 
if it should demand a revolution in things. They 
therefore ask only for a change in the spirit. They 

reinterpret sacrifices and allegorise them. In some passages 1 
we are asked to meditate on the horse-sacrifice. 1 This 
meditative effort helps us to realise the meaning of the 
sacrifice, and it is said to be quite as valuable as making 
a sacrifice. By giving detailed descriptions of the kind of 
plank, the nature of the wood, etc., they show that they 
are not indifferent to the sacrificial religion. While adhering 
to the forms they try to refine them. They say that all 
sacrifices are for the sake of realising the self of man. Life 
itself is a sacrifice. " The true sacrifice is man ; his first 
twenty-four years are his morning libation ... in hunger, 
in thirst, in abstinence from pleasure standeth his conse- 
cration. ... In his eating and drinking and in his pleasures 
he keeps a holy festival, and in his laughter and feasting 
and marrying he sings hymns of praise. Self-discipline, 
generosity, straightforwardness, ahimsa,3 and truth in 
speech, these are his payments, and the bath of purification 
when the sacrifice is over is death.” 4 We are told how 
the divine nature every day sacrifices itself ; by its sacrifice 
do we live. Sacrifice is made to mean not feasting but 
renunciation. Make every action, every feeling and every 
thought an offering to God. Let your life be one sacrament 
or yajna. Sometimes we are told that the sacrifices are 

1 Brh. Up., i. i, 2. * Asvamedha. S Innocence. 

4 Chan. Up., iii. Cf. Isaiah lviii. 6-7: " Is not this the fast that I have 
chosen ? To loose the bonds of wickedness, to undo the heavy burdens, 
and to let the oppressed go free, and that ye break every yoke ? Is it not 
to deal thy bread to the hungry, and that thou bring the poor that are cast 
out to thy house ? When thou seest the naked, that thou cover him, and 
that thou hide not thyself from thine own flesh ? " See Plato : Euthyphron, 
14. E ; Laws, 906, D. Jewett's Edition. 



PHILOSOPHY OF THE UPANISADS 149 

necessary as preparations for the higher path. Nobody can 
tread the higher road without fulfilling the requirements of 
the lower. Sacrifices are necessary for the unenlightened, 
though they alone will not do. They give us admission 
to the world of the fathers, which after a temporary sojourn 
in the moon leads back to a new earthly existence. Cere- 
monialism is contrasted with spiritual worship. 1 There 
are occasions when the sacrificial and priestly religion 
strikes them as superficial, and then they give vent to all 
their irony. They describe a procession of dogs to march 
like a procession of the priests, each holding the tail of the 
other in front and saying, “ Om ! Let us eat. Om, let us 
drink . . . etc.” J Thus the rigid ritual of the Brahmanas, 
which gave little comfort to the weak heart of man, was 
held in check in the Upanisads. 

The attitude of the Upanisads is not favourable to 
the sacredness of the Vedas. Like the rationalistic thinkers 
of a later day, they adopt a double attitude towards Vedic 
authority. They consider the Veda to be of supernatural 
origin, as when they say, “ Just as when a fire is laid 
with damp wood, clouds of smoke spread all around, so in 
truth from this great being, has been breathed forth the 
Rg-Veda, the Yajur-Veda, the Sama-Veda, the hymns of the 
Atharvas and the Angirasas, the narratives, the histories, 
the sciences, the mystical problems, the poems, the proverbs, 
and the expositions — all these have been breathed forth 
from Him.” 3 It is also recognised that the Vedic know- 
ledge is much inferior to the true divine insight, 4 and will 
not liberate us. Narada said: “ I know the Rg-Veda, Sir, 
the Yajur, the Sama-Veda, with all these I know only the 
Mantras and the sacred books, I do not know the Self.” 5 
The Mundaka Upanisad says : “ Two kinds of knowledge 
must be known, the higher and the lower. The lower 
knowledge is that which the Rg, Sama, Atharva Veda, 
Ceremonial, Grammar give . . . but the higher knowledge is 
that by which the indestructible Brahman is apprehended.” 6 

1 See also Chan. Up., i. I, 10. * Ibid., i. 12, 4. 5. 

3 Brh. Up., ii. 4. 10. 

4 See Chandogya, v. 3. 10. Brh., 3. 5. 1 ; iv. 4. 21; vi. 2. 1. Kausitaki, i.; 
Tait., ii. 4; Katha, ii. 23. 

5 Chan. Up., vii. 2. 4 Mundaka, i. 1. 4-5; Maitrayana, vi. 21. 



150 


INDIAN PHILOSOPHY 


VI 

The Problems Discussed in the Upanisads 

The central theme of the Upanisads is the problem 
of philosophy. It is the search for what is true. Dis- 
satisfaction with things and second causes suggests the 
questions, which we read at the beginning of the Svetas- 
vatara : “ Whence are we born, where do we live, and 

whither do we go ? 0, ye who know Brahman, tell us 

at whose command we abide here whether in pain or in 
pleasure. Should time or nature, or necessity or chance, 
or the elements be considered to be the cause, or he who 
is called Purusa, the man that is the Supreme spirit ? ” 
In the Kena Upanisad the pupil asks, “ At whose wish 
does the mind sent forth proceed on its errand ? At whose 
command does the first breath go forth, at whose wish do 
we utter this speech ? What god directs the eye or the 
ear ? ” 1 The thinkers did not take experience to be an 
inexplicable datum, as common sense does. They wondered 
whether the report of the senses could be taken as final. 
Are the mental faculties by which we acquire experience 
self-existent, or are they themselves effects of something 
mightier still, which lies behind them ? How can we 
consider physical objects, effects and products as they 
are, to be quite as real as their causes ? There must 
be something ultimate at the back of it all, a self- 
existent, in which alone the mind can rest. Knowledge, 
mind, the senses and their objects are all finite and con- 
ditioned. In the field of morals we find that we cannot 
get true happiness from the finite. The pleasures of the 
world are transient, being cut off by old age and death. 
Only the infinite gives durable happiness. In religion we 
cry for eternal life. All these force upon us the conviction 
of a timeless being, a spiritual reality, the object of philo- 
sophical quest, the fulfilment of our desires, and the goal 
of religion. The seers of the Upanisads try to lead us to 
this central reality which is infinite existence (sat), absolute 
truth (cit), and pure delight (ananda). The prayer of 

5 i. i. 



PHILOSOPHY OF THE UPANISADS 151 

every human heart is “ Lead me from the unreal to the 
real, lead me from darkness to light, lead me from death 
to immortality.” 1 

We shall deal with the philosophy of the Upanisads 
under the two heads of metaphysics and ethics. We shall 
present their views of ultimate reality, the nature of the 
world, and the problem of creation under metaphysics, 
and their analysis of the individual, his destiny, his ideal, 
the relation of karma to freedom, the highest conception 
of mukti or release, and the doctrine of rebirth under ethics. 


VII 

The Nature of Reality 

In solving the question of the nature of ultimate reality, 
the Upanisad thinkers seek to supplement the objective 
vision of the Vedic seers by a subjective one. The highest 
conception reached in the Vedic hymns was that of the one 
.reality (Ekam Sat), which realises itself in all the variety 
of existence. This conclusion is strengthened in the 
Upanisads, where the problem is sometimes approached by 
way of a philosophical analysis of the nature of the self 
which they call the Atman. The etymology of this word 
is obscure. In the Rg-Veda x. 16. 3 it means breath or 
the vital essence. Gradually it acquired the meaning of 
soul or self. The theory of the true self or Atman is not 
set out with any clearness or fullness of detail, nor are 
isolated statements connected into a coherent system. In 
a dialogue between the teacher Prajapati and the pupil 
Indra, narrated in the Chandogya Upanisad, 2 we find a 
progressive development in the definition of self through 
the four stages of (1) the bodily self, (2) the empirical self, 
(3) the transcendental self, and (4) the absolute self. The 
question discussed is not so much psychological as meta- 
physical. What is the nature of the self of man, his central 
being? Prajapati opens the discussion by giving certain 

1 Asato mi sad gamaya, tamaso ma jyotir gamaya, mrtyor mi amj-taiii- 
gamaya. Brh. Up., i. 3. 27. 



152 INDIAN PHILOSOPHY 

general characteristics which the true self should possess. 
“ The self which is free from sin, free from old age, from 
death and grief, from hunger and thirst, which desires 
nothing but what it ought to desire and imagines nothing 
but what it ought to imagine, that it is which we must try 
to understand.” 1 It is the subject which persists through- 
out the changes, the common factor in the states of waking, 
dream, sleep, death, rebirth and final deliverance.* It is 
the simple truth that nothing can destroy. Death does 
not touch it nor vice dissolve it. Permanence, continuity, 
unity, eternal activity are its characteristics. It is a world 
self-complete. There is nothing outside of it to set against 
it. Modern criticism will object to the whole procedure as 
a case of petitio principii. By the characteristics of self- 
containedness and self-completeness being assumed, the 
solution is taken for granted. But as we shall see, this 
line of procedure has its own meaning. Prajapati makes 
it clear that the self of man consists in the truly subjective, 
which can never become an object. It is the person that 
sees, not the object seen.3 It is not the bundle of qualities 
called the “ me,” but the I which remains beyond and behind 
inspecting all these qualities. It is the subject in the truest 
sense, and it can never become the object. Much of the con- 
tent of the self as ordinarily used can become an object. The 
argument assumes that whatever becomes an object belongs 
to the not-self. We must strip away everything of our 
actual self alien to or different from the self. The first 
answer given is that the body which is born, grows up and 
decays and dies, is the true self. The self, according to 
Prajapati, is indeed he who is seen when you look into 
another’s eye or a pail of water or a mirror. It is suggested 
that we observe a picture even to the very hairs and nails. 
To indicate that it is not the self, Prajapati asks Indra 
to adorn himself, put on the best clothes and look again 
into the water and the mirror, and he sees his likeness 
well adorned with best clothes and clean. A doubt occurs 
to Indra. “ As this self in the shadow or the water is well 
adorned when the body is well adorned, well dressed 
when the body is well dressed, well cleaned when the body 
* viii. 7. 1. * See Byb. Up., iv. 4. 3. < viii. 7. 3. 



PHILOSOPHY OF THE UPANISADS 153 


is well cleaned, that self will also be blind if the body 
is blind, lame if the body is lame, crippled if the body is 
crippled, and perish, in fact, as soon as the body perishes. 
I see no good in this.” 1 Indra approaches his teacher 
Prajapati, and after another long interval is told that 
“ he who moves about happy in dreams is the self.” The 
true self is not the body which is exposed to all suffering 
and imperfections, which is a material phenomenon. The 
body is only an instrument used by consciousness, while 
consciousness is not the product of the body. And now 
Indra is told that the dreaming subject is the self, but he 
feels another difficulty. “ Though it is true that that self 
is not rendered faulty by faults of body, nor struck when 
it is struck, nor lamed when it is lamed, yet it is as if they 
struck him in dreams, as if they chased him. He becomes 
even conscious as it were of pain and sheds tears, therefore 
I see no good in this.”* Prajapati took the dream states 
instead of other mental experiences, because dreams being 
more independent of body are crucial in their nature. The 
self is supposed to roam untrammelled in dreams. In 
them the mind is said to float free of the accidents of body. 
This view equates the self with the ever-growing and changing 
mental experiences. This is the empirical self, and Indra 
rightly recognises that this empirical self is subject to the 
accidents of experience. It cannot be the subject, for every 
moment it is changing. Though it is independent of body, 
dream states do not seem to be self-existent, which the 
true self or Atman must be. The ego dependent on the 
limitations of time and birth cannot be said to be eternal. 
The self tethered to a local and temporal environment is 
a creature of time. It is the wanderer in the world of 
samsara. It constructs for itself an imperfect world out 
of imperfect data. It is not indestructible, nor has it 
boundless freedom. We seem to require a subject as the 
ground and sustainer of all experience, a vaster reality of 
which the dream states as well as waking experience are 
only imperfect revelations. A mere flux of states cannot 
be sustained by itself. The empirical self is not eternal 
in its own right. Indra again approaches Prajapati, explains 

* v:h ■, x. * v :i 10. a. ^ 



154 


INDIAN PHILOSOPHY 


to him his position, and after a long time is taught. *' When 
a man being asleep, reposing and at perfect rest, sees no 
dreams, that is the self.” 1 Prajapati understands Indra’ s 
difficulty. The self could not be reduced to a series of 
states, for that would be to explain away the reality of a 
permanent ego, and make Atman subject to the vicissitudes 
of our chance experiences. Indra has to be taught that 
the objects of experience require a permanent subject by 
which they could be experienced. Prajapati intended to 
bring out how, while a grin required a cat, everywhere 
except in Alice’s wonderland, a cat need not always have 
a grin. The object depends upon the subject, but not the 
subject on the object in the same sense. Without the self 
there can be no knowledge, no art, no morality. Objects 
out of relation to a self are non-existent. From the subject 
are all objects and the subject itself is not a thing among 
other things. To enable Indra to realise that the self is 
the subject of all experiences, Prajapati employs the method 
of abstraction which has its own disadvantages. Our life 
is ordinarily busy with things. The world is too much 
with us. Our self is lost in feelings, desires and imaginations, 
and does not know what it really is. Leading the life of 
mere objectivity, absorbed in the things of nature, ever 
busy with the active pursuits of the world, we do not want 
to waste a moment’s thought on the first principle of all 
things — the self of man. Knowledge is taken for granted. 
To reflect on it, to understand its implications, means mental 
strain. In the history of European thought the question 
of the possibility of knowledge is a late one, but when it 
was put, it was realised that knowledge was impossible 
without what Kant called the transcendental unity of 
apperception, what Plotinus referred to as the “ accom- 
paniment " by the soul of its own mental activities. The 
most elementary presentation requires the reality of self. 
In the most apparently passive perceptions we realise the 
activity of the self. All changes, all experiences, assume 
a central self. The changes themselves are recog 
nised as changes wdthin a whole, which we are trying to 
actualise. Prajapati wishes to bring out the necessity 

1 viii. ii. i. 



PHILOSOPHY OF THE UPANISADS 155 


of this self by urging that the self continuously exists, 
even when the waking or the dreaming experience is sus- 
pended. In sleep, deep and dreamless, we have no felt 
objects of experience, but we cannot on that account say 
there is no self. Prajapati assumes that Indra will admit 
the reality of a self in sleep, for the continuity of conscious- 
ness, despite the temporal gaps, cannot otherwise be accounted 
for. Devadatta, after good sleep, continues to be Devadatta, 
since his experiences unite themselves to the system which 
existed at the time when he went to sleep. They link 
themselves to his thoughts and do not fly to any other’s. 
This continuity of experience requires us to admit a perma- 
nent self underlying all contents of consciousness. That 
which exists in sleep without any objects to contemplate 
is the self. The mirror is not shattered simply because 
nothing is seen in it. Prajapati tries to bring out the 
absolute supremacy of the subject over the object, the 
truth of Yajnavalkya’s statement that even when all objects 
are extinguished, the subject persists in its own light. 
“ When the sun has set, when the moon has set, and when the 
fire is put out, the self alone is his light.” 1 But Indra was 
too much of a psychologist for Prajapati. He felt 
that this self, freed from all bodily experience, from 
the shapeless mass of dreams, etc., this objectless self, 
is a barren fiction. If the self is not what it knows, feels 
and reacts upon, if it is divorced from it and thus emptied 
of its content, what remains ? “ Nothing,” said Indra. 

" To be free from everything is to be nothing.” 2 Gautama, 
the Buddha, takes up the analogy of a tree and asks what 
is that tree which is supposed to remain, after we tear away 
its leaves, hew down its branches, strip off its bark, etc. ? 
Peel off layer after layer of an onion, and what remains ? 
Nothing. Bradley points out : " The ego that pretends to 
be anything either before or beyond its concrete psychical 
filling is a gross fiction and a mere monster, and for no 
purpose admissible. ” 3 On this view in dreamless sleep 
there is no self at all. Locke declares that every drowsy 

* Brh. Up., iv. 3. 6. 

’ Bradley : Ethical Studies, p. 5a. 

I Appearance and Reality, p. 89. 

6 


VOL. I 



156 INDIAN PHILOSOPHY 

nod explodes the self theory. " In sleep and trances the 
mind exists not — there is no time, no succession of ideas. 
To say the mind exists without thinking is a contradiction, 
nonsense, nothing.” 1 Indra seems to have been an em- 
piricist ages before Locke and Berkeley. “ If the soul in 
a perfectly dreamless sleep thinks, feels, and wills nothing, 
is the soul then at all, and if it is, how is it ? ” asks Lotze. 
“ How often has the answer been given, that if this could 
happen, the soul would have no being. Why have we not 
the courage to say that as often as this happens the soul 
is not ? ” 1 Indra has the courage to declare it. 3 “ It is 
indeed destroyed.” This has an important lesson which is 
again and again forgotten in Indian thought. To deny 
the life without is to destroy the god within. Those who 
think that we reach the highest point attainable, in pure 
subj ectivity must turn to the dialogue of Indra and Praj apati. 
The condition freed from the limits imposed by the organism, 
from time and space, from the existence of objects, is simple 
annihilation, according to Indra. This contentless ego, this 
abstract cogito of Descartes, this formal unity of Kant, 
this objectless subject supposed to stand behind, unrelated 
to all empirical consciousness, is an impossibility. Philo- 
sophical reflection as well as psychological analysis leads 
to this result. But Prajapati was trying to emphasise the 
identity of the self which is unaffected by the changes of 
experience. He was anxious to point out that while the 
self was not exclusive of conscious states, it was not the 
conscious states. Dr. McTaggart puts the whole point thus : 
” What does the self include ? Everything of which it is 
conscious. What does it exclude ? Equally-Everything of 
which it is conscious. What can it say is not inside it ? 
Nothing What can it say is not outside it ? A single 
abstraction. And any attempt to remove the paradox 
destroys the self. For the two sides are inevitably con- 
nected. If we try to make it a distinct individual by 
separating it from all other things, it loses all content, of 
which it can be conscious, and so loses the very individuality 

* Berkeley’s Works, vol. i. p. 34. 

• Metaphysics, Eng. Translation, vol. ii., p. 317. 

1 Vinasamevapito bhavati, Chan. Up., viii. 11. 1—2, 



PHILOSOPHY OF THE UPANISADS 157 


which we started by trying to preserve. If, on the other 
hand, we try to save its content, by emphasising the inclusion 
at the expense of the exclusion, then the consciousness 
vanishes ; and since the self has no contents, but the obj ects 
of which it is conscious, the contents vanish also.” 1 Indra 
shows the risks in conceiving the self as a transcendental 
one. The self must be shown to be the true life of the 
whole, and not a mere abstraction. Hence the next step, 
when Indra explains to Prajapati his difficulty in the words, 
" in truth that dreamless sleeping subject does not know 
himself that he is, nor does he know anything that exists. 
He is gone to utter annihilation, I see no good in this.” 1 
Prajapati points out how it is an identity, running in and 
through differences. The whole world is the one process 
of the self-realisation of the absolute thought. “ Magha- 
van ! 3 This body is mortal and all is subject to death. 
It is the abode of the self, which is immortal and without 
body. He is the person of the eye, the eye itself is the 
instrument of seeing. He who knows, let me smell this, 
he is the self, the nose is the instrument of smelling, etc.” 4 
The self is shown to be not an abstract formal principle, 
but an active universal consciousness, existing, to adopt 
Hegel’s phraseology, both in itself and for itself. It is 
simple self-sameness as well as varied distinctions. It is 
both subject and object. The objects we know in experi- 
ence are based on it. The true infinite self is not the self 
which is simply not finite. It is none of the limited things, 
but yet the basis of all of them. It is the universal self, 
which is immanent as well as transcendent. The whole 
universe lives and breathes in it. “ The moon and the 
sun are its eyes, the four quarters of the sky its ears, the 
wind its breath. ”5 It is the blazing light that burns in 

1 Hegelian Cosmology, sec. 27. » viii. 11. 1. 

3 Another name for Indra. 

♦ viii. 12. Cf. Plato, who distinguishes In the Timceus, two souls, one 
immortal and the other mortal. The mortal soul consists of passions and 
affections. It is the empirical ego which identifies itself with the perishing 
world of change and death. The immortal soul is the intelligent principle 
common to man and the world, the divine spark enclosed in human person- 
ality ( Timceus and Phcedo). We have also the same distinction in Aristotle’s 
intellects agens as opposed to perishing mind and memory. 

I Mundaka, i. 1 ; Chan., iii. 13. 7. 



153 


INDIAN PHILOSOPHY 


the deeps of personality, the universal akasa from which 
all creatures proceed, 1 the vital principle of creation, 2 the 
subject in which the entire world moves trembling.3 There 
is nothing outside it. It contains all consciousness of objects 
implicitly. There is nothing in the universe which is not 
involved in the infinite self in us. This self which embraces 
all is the sole reality containing within itself all the facts 
of nature and all the histories of experience. Our small 
selves are included in it and transcended by it. This is 
the subject which is more than the flux of presentations, 
which are only imperfect revelations of it. All our states 
of consciousness revolve round this central light. Abolish 
it, they vanish. Without a subject there will be no flux, 
no order of sensations in space or sequences in time. It 
renders possible memory and introspection, knowledge and 
morality. The Upanisads contend that this subject is the 
universal ground which is in all individuals. It is hidden 
in all things and pervades all creation. “ There is no second 
outside it, no other distinct term.” 4 “ As breathing he is 
named breath, as speaking speech, as seeing eye, as hearing 
ear, as understanding mind, all these are but names for 
his operations.” 5 It is only the self thus understood that 
can be looked upon as the permanent subject persisting 
in waking and dreaming, death and sleep, bondage and 
liberation. It is present throughout, surveying all the 
worlds. It is the universal subject and yet the universal 
object. It sees and yet sees not. As the Upanisad has it, 
“ When then he sees not, yet is he seeing, although he sees 
not ; since for the seer there is no interruption of seeing 
because he is imperishable ; but there is no second beside 
him, no other distinct from him, for him to see.” 6 The 
self is the whole. “I indeed am this whole universe.” 7 
This universal self by its very nature cannot be per- 
ceived. As Samkara puts it, " The witness self illumines 
consciousness, but never itself is in consciousness.” It is 
not a datum of experience, not an object, though all objects 

* Chin., i. 91. 

3 Katha, vi. X. 

5 Brh., i. 4. 7 ; KausiCaki, iii, 

1 Aharn eva idam sarvo’smi. 


* Chan., i. xr, 5. 

4 Brh., iv. 3. 23 ; Chan., viii. x. 3. 
6 Brh., iv. 3. 23. 



PHILOSOPHY OF THE UPANISADS 159 


are for it. It is not a thought, but all thoughts are for it. 
It is not a thing seen, but is the principle of all seeing. As 
Kant would say, the condition of the empirically known 
is not the known itself. “ What I must presuppose in order 
to know an object,” says Kant, “ I cannot know as an 
object.” The subject of all experience cannot itself be an 
experience. If it is experience, the question arises, by 
whom is it known ? Knowledge always works dually. 
This self, therefore, is indefinable. Like all ultimate prin- 
ciples, it has only to be accepted. It is the explanation 
of all else, though it itself remains unexplained. The old 
difficulty of Comte that the subject cannot turn round 
and catch itself is not altogether imaginary. “ The soul 
which is not this or that, nor aught else, is intangible, for 
it cannot be laid hold of.” 1 The Upanisads refuse to identify 
the self with the body, or the series of mental states or the 
presentation continuum or the stream of consciousness. 
The self cannot be a relation which requires a ground of 
relations, nor a connexion of contents, which is unintelligible 
without an agent who connects. We are obliged to accept the 
reality of a universal consciousness which ever accompanies 
the contents of consciousness and persists even when there 
are no contents. This fundamental identity, which is the 
presupposition of both self and not-self, is called the Atman. 
None can doubt its reality. 1 

The Mandukya Upanisad gives us an analysis of con- 
sciousness leading to the same conclusion. We shall start 
with a free rendering of what it says on this point. 3 The 
soul has three conditions which are all included in a fourth. 
They are waking, dreaming, sleeping, and what is called 
turiya. The first condition is that of wakefulness, where the 
self is conscious of the common world of external objects. It 
enjoys the gross things. Here the dependence on the body 
is predominant. The second condition is that of dreaming, 
where the self enjoys subtle things/ fashions for itself a 
new world of forms with the materials of its waking ex- 
perience. The spirit is said to roam freely unfettered by 

1 Brh., iii. 7. 3 ; iv. 4. 22. 

■ Ka hi kascit sandigdhe aham va naham veti. Bhamatl. 

I i. 2. 7. * See Brh., iv. 3. 9. 14. 



160 


INDIAN PHILOSOPHY 


the bonds of the body. The third is the condition of sound 
sleep, where we have neither dreams nor desires. It is 
called susupti. The soul is said to become temporarily 
one with Brahman and enjoy bliss. In deep sleep we are 
lifted above all desires and freed from the vexations of 
spirit. The oppositions are, so to say, lost in this pure- 
objectless-knowing subject condition. 1 Samkara observes 
that the phenomena of duality caused by the action of the 
mind are present in the other two conditions, but absent 
here. In several passages we are told that we taste the 
nature of absolute bliss in dreamless sleep, where a man 
is cut off from the distracting world. The soul is divine 
in origin, though clogged with the flesh. In sleep it is said 
to be released from the shackles of the body and to gain 
back its own nature. We read in an Aristotelian fragment, 
“ whenever the soul is alone and by itself in sleep, it recovers 
by its proper nature.” 2 The natural divinity of the soul 
reasserts itself when freed from the tyranny of the flesh. 
“ He giveth his beloved truth in sleep.” The analogy of 
eternal dreamless sleep is used to bring out how all outer 
activities are then suppressed. But there was the likelihood 
of its being confused with sheer unconsciousness. So the 
Mandukya Upanisad points out that the highest is not 
this dreamless sleep, but another, a fourth state of the soul, 
a pure intuitional consciousness, where there is no knowledge 
of objects internal or external. In deep sleep the spirit 
dwells in a region far above the changeful life of sense in 
absolute union with Brahman. The turiya condition brings 
out the positive aspect of the negative emphasised in the 
condition of deep sleep. “ The fourth is not that which is 
conscious of the subjective, nor that which is conscious of 
the objective, nor that which is conscious of both, nor 
that which is simple consciousness, nor that which is an 
all-sentient mass, nor that which is all darkness. It is 
unseen, transcendent, inapprehensible, uninferrable, un- 
thinkable, indescribable, the sole essence of the conscious- 
ness of self, the completion of the world, the ever peace- 
ful, all blissful, the one unit, this indeed is the Atman.” 3 

1 See Bfh., ii. i ; Kausltaki, iv. ; Chan., vi. 8. i ; Prasna., iv. 4 ; iv 3. 7. 

* Fragment 2. I i. 7. 



PHILOSOPHY OF THE UPANISADS 161 


It is symbolised by the Aumkara, with its parts of A-U-M, 
the waking, the dreaming and the sleeping states. It is 
not an exclusive self, but the common ground of all, their 
basis of identity. 1 In deep sleep we may be said to reach 
an eternal unity in which all distinctions vanish and the 
entire universe is obliterated. But since this cannot be 
considered the highest state, a higher positive is suggested. 
To the empirical individual, if the not-self goes, his indi- 
viduality also vanishes. So there is a suspicion that the 
abolition of the objects would reduce the self into a thin 
abstraction, but in the highest universal self the reality of 
all objects is included. Objects of the world are known 
and loved by us only in so far as they enter our self, which 
comprehends in itself all objects of the universe and has 
nothing outside. It is the unchanged and persistent identity 
which continues in the midst of all change. The moods 
pass and vary but the self remains the same. It has no 
beginning, no end, though the objects of which it is conscious 
have a beginning and an end. “ Never has the cessation 
of consciousness been experienced, or witnessed directly ; 
or if it has been, then the witness, the experiencer, himself 
still remains behind as the continued embodiment of that 
same consciousness.” 2 It is the foundation of all existence, 
the one witness to and the only possible support of all we 
know, though the nature of the dependence of the objects 
of knowledge on the subject so insistently repeated is not 
very clear. The three conditions of the self, waking, dream- 
ing, sleeping, together with that which comprehends them 
all, are called respectively the Visva, the Taijasa, the Prajna 
and the Turiya states.3 

From this analysis of the three states of dreaming, 
waking and sleeping, it follows that all of them are unreal, 
though not non-existent. “ What is naught at the beginning 
and naught at the end must surely be naught in the middle.” 4 
Judged by it, waking experience is not real. If it is said 


» Trisu dhamasu yat tulyam samanyam — Gaudapada’s Kankas, i. 22. 
* See Devi Bhagavata, iii. 32. 15-16. 

J The Buddhist discrimination of the four planes of kama, rupa, arupa 
and lokottara, answers to this division. 

« Gaudapada’s Karika, i. 6. 



162 INDIAN PHILOSOPHY 

that the dream states are unreal since they do not cohere 
with the rest of our experience, may it not be urged that 
the waking experience does not cohere with dreams ? 
Dreams may be coherent within themselves, even as waking 
experience is within its own bounds. The worlds seem to 
be real only in relation to the particular moods of the self. 
It is not right to apply the standard of waking experience 
to the dream world and condemn it. Dreaming and waking 
experiences are both unreal though in different degrees. 
The condition of dreamless sleep is one in which we have 
no distinct cognitions of anything internal or external. It 
is a distinctionless mass under the pall of darkness, com- 
parable to Hegel’s night, in which all cows are black. We 
have here the negative condition of the highest state, freedom 
from sorrow. But Atman is not this absence of unhappiness. 
It is positive bliss. It is neither waking nor dreaming nor 
sleep, but the fourth witnessing to as well as transcending 
the three. The negative descriptions given indicate that 
we as finite cannot know the positive nature of it. The 
fourth is realised, not so much by negating the three as by 
transcending them all. It is impossible for us finite beings 
to define the character of the ideal reality, though the 
Upanisads are quite emphatic that it is not a blank. Yet 
to refute false ideas of the highest and to point the truth 
that it is no abstraction, they indulge in inadequate con- 
cepts. Strictly speaking we cannot say anything of it. 
Yet for purposes of discussion, we are obliged to use intel- 
lectual concepts with their limited validity. 

The problem of the self is one of the most important 
discussed in the Upanisads. It occurs again as the 
Adhyatma Vidya in the Bhagavadgita and the Vedanta 
Sutras. The analysis of the nature of self is the legacy of 
the Upanisads bequeathed to the subsequent systems of 
thought. It has given rise to many misconceptions. Con- 
tradictory doctrines of the nature of self are held by Buddha 
and Samkara, Kapila and Patanjali, whose views can be traced 
to the Upanisads. It was not the intention of the Upani- 
sads to make of the deeper self an abstract nothingness. It 
is the fullest reality, the completest consciousness, and not a 
mere negative calm, untroubled by any unrest and unpolluted 



PHILOSOPHY OF THE UPANISADS 163 


by any blot or blemish. The logic of thought has in it 
a negative movement, where it rises by the repudiation of 
the finite, but this is only a stage in the onward march. 
By the negative process the self has to recognise that its 
essence is not in its finitude or self-sufficiency. By the 
positive method it finds its true self in the life and being of 
all. All things exist within this true self. Some Buddhists 
make of the self mere emptiness, and on this assumption 
rightly dismiss it as an abstraction of the metaphysician. 
We cannot find this self in any corner of the field of con- 
sciousness. Not finding it there, we rush to the conclusion 
that it is nothing. The Samkhya takes it to be a simple 
and pure, though passive, spirit, which in spite of its apparent 
simplicity has some character and uniqueness, and so we 
get the doctrine of the boundless plurality of souls. Some 
Vedantins adopt the view that the true self or Brahman 
is pure, calm, peaceful and untroubled, and hold that there 
is only one self. By throwing the emphasis on the passive 
side they run the risk of reducing it to mere emptiness. 
There are Buddhistic sects which reduce the self to mere 
intelligence, which can somehow think without any contents. 


VIII 

Brahman 

We may now proceed to define the ultimate reality from 
the objective side, when it is called Brahman 1 . In the 

1 The question how Brahman came to denote the supreme reality of the 
Upanisads has been answered in diSerent ways by different scholars. 
Haug holds that Brahman means prayer, being derived from the root 
Brh, to swell or to grow. It is that which swells or grows. Sacred 
prayers cause the growth, and then it came to mean the force of nature, and 
later the supreme reality. According to Roth, Brahman is first the force 
of will directed to the gods, then it came to mean a sacred formula, and then 
the Absolute. Oldenberg thinks that in the Vedic times, when the world 
was peopled with many gods and mysterious forces capable of producing 
happiness and misery, the most powerful man was the medicine man, who 
wielded the magic spell and produced whatever effect was desired. Then 
Brahman meant a magic spell. During the time of the Brahmanas it 
referred to the sacred hymns used in the sacrifices. Perhaps some of these 
hymns were used as spells for producing magical effects. The word was 
slowly transferred to the central energy which produces the world. Deussen 

6 * 


VOL. I 



164 


INDIAN PHILOSOPHY 


Rg-Veda we have seen that the monistic idea was arrived 
at. The Upanisads undertake the task of a more logical 
definition of the Eternal Spirit ever acting and ever resting. 
In another place we have traced the progress from the 
lower imperfect conceptions to the more adequate anes 
as formulated in the Taittiriya Upanisad. 1 In chapter iii 
the son approaches the father with the request to teach 
him the nature of reality from which all things flow 
and to which all return. The son is given the general 
features of Brahman, and is asked to discover the content 
which satisfies these requirements. “ That from which these 
beings are born, that in which when born they live, and that 
into which they enter at their death, that is Brahman.” 3 
Things of the world are ever changing their forms, and 
they cannot be considered to be real in an ultimate 
sense. Is there anything unalterably fixed underlying the 
universe of changing things, namarupa, name and form, as 
the Upanisads call them ? The son considers matter to 
be the ultimate reality. It is the most prominent aspect 
of the outer world. This view is held by the lokayatas, or 
the materialists. The son soon discovers that matter cannot 
account for the life phenomena. Vegetable growth requires 
a different explanation. He hits upon prana or life as 
the ultimate principle. 3 Matter does not hold the secret 
of life, though life cannot exist without matter. There is 
something in life which enables it to absorb and transmute 
the inorganic elements. This something is the vital principle 
which in man helps to change the vegetable product into 
blood, bone and muscle. It is the principle which pervades 
the universe and binds human beings with the rest of 
creation. 4 The son is sure that life belongs to a different 
order from matter though prana is the essence of the body. 5 


holds that Brahman is prayer, which elevates the soul, when we perceive the 
truth, and the truth came to be denoted by the word. Max Muller traces 
it to “word,” as is evident from the name Brhaspati or Vacaspati, lord 
of speech. That which utters is Brahman (S.S., pp. 52, 70). We need not 
trouble ourselves about the etymology of the word. To us, it is clear. Brahman 
means reality, which grows, breathes or swells. 

1 See Reign of Religion, chap. xiii. » iii. t. 

I Prana means breath. See R.V., i. 66. 1 ; iii. 53. 21 ; x. 59. 6. 

* See Prasna, ii. s Brh.. i. 3. 90. See Chan., vi. 2. 4. 



PHILOSOPHY OF THE UPANISADS 165 


Again he is dissatisfied with the solution of prana as the 
ultimate reality, for conscious phenomena which we come 
across in the animal world are not explicable by the prin- 
ciple of life. Manas, or perceptual consciousness, is a pro- 
duct distinct from life and matter. It seems to be the 
crown of the vital process. So the son believes that manas 
is Brahman. Even this will not suffice, for there are intel- 
lectual facts which mere perceptual consciousness does 
not take into account. Vijnana or intelligence is Brahman. 1 
Some schools of Buddhism adopt this view. The son realises 
that even intellectual self-consciousness is incomplete, 
being subject to discord and imperfection. It is the aim 
of the Upanisads to point out that elements of duality 
and externality persist at the intellectual level, however 
much we may try to overcome them. In knowledge and 
morality we have the subject-object relation. There must 
be something higher than mere intellect, where existence is 
no longer formulated in terms of knowledge. The unity of 
existence requires that we must transcend the intellectual 
level. Thought, as ordinarily understood, deals with objects 
viewed as beyond or other than the process of thinking. It 
reaches outwards to a somewhat other than and contrasted 
with itself. Reality is different from thought, and can 
be reached in the turiya state of highest immediacy, which 
transcends thought and its distinctions, where the individual 
coincides with the central reality. Ananda or delight is 
the highest fruition, where the knower, the known and 
the knowledge become one. Here the philosophical quest 
terminates, the suggestion being that there is nothing 
higher than ananda. This ananda is active enjoyment 
or unimpeded exercise of capacity. It is not sinking 
into nothingness, but the perfection of being. 1 “ The 
discerning see by their superior knowledge the Atman 
which shines all bliss and immortality.” 3 Strictly speaking, 
we cannot give any account of the highest reality of ananda. 
Even thi question whether it is abstract or concrete is 
illogical. Intellectual necessities require us to give some 
description. It is truer to consider it concrete than abstract. 


1 See Ait., iii. 3 ; Tait., iii 5 
• See Mun<Jaka Up. 


I MuijiJaka. ii. 8. 



166 INDIAN PHILOSOPHY 

Each higher principle is more concrete and inclusive than 
the lower one, and therefore ananda, which is Brahman, 
is the most inclusive of all. From it all things flow. By 
it all things are sustained, and into it all things are dis- 
solved. The different parts, the mineral world, the plant 
life, the animal kingdom, and the human society, are not 
related to the highest in any abstract or mechanical way. 
They are one in and through that which is universal about 
them. All parts in the universe share in the light of this 
universal spirit and possess specific features on account 
of the special functions which they have to perform. The 
parts are not self-subsistent factors, but are dependent 
aspects of the one. “ Sir, on what does the infinite rest ? 
On its own greatness or not even on greatness.” Every- 
thing else hangs on it and it hangs on nothing. The organic 
and living nature of the relation of the parts to the whole 
is brought out in many passages. " As all spokes are con- 
tained in the axle, and in the felly of a wheel, thus also, 
all beings and all gods, all worlds and all organs, also are 
contained in that self .” 1 " There is that ancient tree 
whose roots grow upward and whose branches go downward. 
That is the bright. Brahman, the immortal, all worlds are 
contained in it and no one goes beyond it.” 1 

We have defined reality as ananda, and thus contra- 
dicted the statement frequently made that the ultimate 
is indefinable. Constructive attempts at obtaining a com- 
prehensive reality generally end in a concrete whole. If, 
however, we try to reconcile the defined reality with the 
undefined one, which also the Upanisads support, then 
we shall have to say that ananda in the present context 
is not the ultimate reality, but only the highest conceivable 
by the thought of man. It is not the absolute or the eternal 
being which ever exists in its own essentiality. To the 
logical mind, the whole is real, and within it falls the diversity 
of the world. The concrete ananda is the pramanika 
satta, or the real revealed to thought, and answers to 
the highest Brahman accepted by Ramanuja. The pure 
Brahman free from all the predicates is the nirupadhika 

» Brh., ii. 5- 15- 

• Katha, ii. 6. I. See also Tait., 1. io; B.G., xv. 1. 



PHILOSOPHY OF THE UPANISADS 167 


satta, or the Nirguna Brahman accepted by Samkara. The 
former is an organised whole ; the latter is an indefinable 
real. Yet even according to Samkara it is the latter that 
shows itself as the former. The one of intuition appears 
as the whole of knowledge. 1 * 

This difference of view has resulted in a good deal of 
discussion about the interpretation of ananda in the 
Upanisads. Samkara squarely says that anandamaya, by 
its suffix maya, indicates that it is only a phenomenal effect. 
Unless it were different from Atman, there can be no talk 
of reasoning about it. If it were pure Brahman, it will 
be inappropriate to give it form and attribute to it head, 
limbs, as the Taittiriya Upanisad does. If ananda were 
Brahman there would be no separate mention of Brahman 
as the supporting tail of ananda. 3 So fsamkara concludes, 
" Anandamaya Atman is an effect, and not the uncon- 
ditioned Atman.” Ramanuja, on the other hand, argues that 
this ananda is Brahman. The suffix of maya indicates 
only fullness or pracurya. Though with regard to matter, 
life, etc., it is clearly stated that there is some other inside, 
anyo 'ntara Atma, no such inner reality is asserted for ananda. 
Ascribing limbs, etc., is nothing more than kalpana or im- 
agination. Puccham Brahma need not be taken as implying 
any difference between ananda and Brahman. The two 
may be related as whole and part,3 which is sometimes the 
significance of the accusative usage. Immediately after the 
reference to anandamaya, it is said in the Upanisad 
“ sokamayata,” “ he desired,” and this masculine gender 
can only refer to anandamaya, and not to puccham Brahma, 


1 The Upanisads are definite about the fact that the supreme is in- 
definable, though they give intellectual accounts of it which are not abso- 
lutely true. If any logical description be true at all, it is Ramanuja’s way 
of putting it, Sariikara, in the true spirit of the Upanisads, contends that 
there is a higher than the logical highest, which is Ramanuja’s. In discussing 
the philosophy of Sarhkara, we shall see how he establishes the inadequacy 
of the highest categories to the reality intended by them. He contends 

that we cannot say whether the absolute is finite or infinite, or both or neither. 
It is the same with all relations like whole and part, substance and quality, 
cause and effect. A rational demonstration of the limits of thought such 
as the one we have in Sarhkara is rendered possible only by the intervening 
of the great Buddhist tradition between the Upanisads and 6amkara. 

* Brahma puccham prati§th«L 3 Samudayasamudaylbhava. 



168 INDIAN PHILOSOPHY 

which is neuter. Other forms of bliss, like priya, moda, 
are included within the whole of ananda, and the disciple 
reaches his final resting-place when he gets to ananda. 
We have many cases in the same Upanisad where the 
word ananda is used as a synonym for final reality. 

It is obvious that the whole controversy is due to the 
doubt whether ananda is to be looked upon as the logical 
highest or the ultimate being. The Upanisads did not 
draw any hard and fast line of distinction between the 
simple one of intuition supported by Saihkara and the 
concrete whole of Ramanuja. If we separate the two, 
it will become impossible for us to admit any distinction 
or value in the world of concrete existence. The Upanisads 
imply that the Isvara is practically one with Brahman. 
Very strict usage and meticulous philosophic accuracy 
require us to say that there is the slightest conceivable 
diminution from the absolute when we come to the self- 
conscious, I am I. 1 This quasinought is quite enough for 
Sarhkara to precipitate pure being, the basal thought and fact 
of all, into the world of space, time and cause. The Upanisads 
by implication admit that the moment we think the pure 
being, we make nothing the principle of distinction and 
difference, equally basal. The self-conscious God, who later 
develops into the organised whole of existence, is the maxi- 
mum of being and the minimum of non-being. He is least 
penetrated with objectivity and touched by externality. 
The One is revealed in the existences of the world, and that is 
why we are able to ascertain the degrees of reality possessed 
by the objects of the world by measuring the distance 
separating them from the One. Each lower degree con- 
sists in a diminution of the higher, though throughout 
the scale of existences from the highest to the lowest we 
have the revelation of Brahman as well as the common 
characters of space, time and cause. The lower things are 
far away from the simple being than the higher ones, so 
much so that the anandamaya of the Upanisads, the 
concrete Brahman of Ramanuja, the Isvara of Saihkara, 
is the nearest to it. Nothing nearer can be thought. The 
supreme Brahman or ananda at the level of vijnana or 

* Bfh„ i. 4, io. 



PHILOSOPHY OF THE UPANISADS 169 


self-consciousness becomes the personal Isvara with a 
voluntary limitation. God or self is the ground of unity, 
and matter or not-self becomes the principle of plurality. 1 


IX 

Brahman and Atman 

The two, the objective and the subjective, the Brahman 
and the Atman, the cosmic and the psychical principles, are 
looked upon as identical. Brahman is Atman. 3 “ He who 
is this Brahman in man, and who is that in the sun, those 
are one.” 3 The transcendent conception of God held in 
the Rg-Veda is here transformed into an immanent one. 
The infinite is not beyond the finite but in the finite. The 
subjective character of the Upanisad teaching is responsible 
for this change. The identity between the subject and 
the object was realised in India before Plato was born. 
Deussen speaks of it thus : “ If we strip this thought of 
the various forms, figurative to the highest degree and not 
seldom extravagant, under which it appears in the Vedanta 
texts, and fix our attention upon it solely in its philosophical 
simplicity as the identity of God and the soul, the Brahman 
and the Atman, it will be found to possess a significance 
reaching far beyond the Upanisads, their time and country ; 
nay, we claim for it an inestimable value for the whole 
race of mankind. We are unable to look into the future, 
we do not know what revelations and discoveries are in 
store for the restlessly inquiring human spirit ; but one 
thing we may assert with confidence — whatever new and 
unwonted paths the philosophy of the future may strike 
out, this principle will remain permanently unshaken, and 
from it no deviation can possibly take place. If ever a 
general solution is reached of the great riddle, which presents 
itself to the philosopher in the nature of things, all the more 
clearly the further our knowledge extends, the key can 
only be found where alone the secret of nature lies open 

1 See Tait., i. 5 ; S.B. and R.B. on V.S., i. 1. 6. 1 Tait., i. 5, 

3 ii. 8. See also iii. 10 ; Chan., iii. 13. 7; iii. 14.2.4; Brh., v. 5. 2 ; 
Mundaka, ii. 1. 10. 



170 INDIAN PHILOSOPHY 

to us from within, that is to say, in our innermost self. It 
was here that for the first time the original thinkers of the 
Upanisads, to their immortal honour, found it when they 
recognised our Atman, our inmost individual being, as the 
Brahman, the inmost being of universal nature and of all 
her phenomena.” 1 This identity of subject and object is 
not a vague hypothesis, but the necessary implication of 
all relevant thinking, feeling and willing. The human self 
cannot think, conquer and love nature, were it unthinkable, 
unconquerable and unlovable. Nature is the object of 
a subject, quite rational and thoroughly intelligible, capable 
of control and worthy of love. It exists for man. The 
stars serve as lamps for his feet, and the darkness to lull 
him into slumber. Nature summons us to the spiritual 
reality of life and answers the needs of the soul. It is 
formed, vitalised and directed by the spirit. From the 
beginning of reflection this oneness of subject and object, 
the existence of one central reality, pervading and embracing 
all, has been the doctrine of the devout. Religious mysticism 
and deep piety witness to the truth of the great saying, 
" That art thou,” " Tat tvamasi.” We may not understand 
it, but that does not give us a sufficient right to deny it. 

The different conceptions of Brahman correspond to the 
different ideas of the Atman, and vice versa. The stages 
of waking, dreaming, sleeping, and the conception of ecstasy 
of the self, are clearly discriminated in the later Vedanta 
writings and answer to the different conceptions of Brahman. 
The highest Brahman which is ananda is just Atman, 
as realised in the fourth or the turiya state. There the 
object and the subject are one. The seer, the seeing eye 
and the object seen merge together in one whole. W'he” 
we identify the Atman with the self-conscious individual, 
Brahman is viewed as the self-conscious Isvara with a 
force opposed to him. As the self-conscious individual 
will be a mere abstraction apart from some content or 
object from which he derives his being, even so the Isvara 
requires an element opposing him. The conception of 
Isvara is the highest object of the religious consciousness. 
When the Atman is identified with the mental and vital 
! Philosophy of the Upanisads, pp. 39-40. 



PHILOSOPHY OF THE UP AN IS ADS 171 

self of man (manas and prana). Brahman is reduced to 
the Hiranyagarbha or the cosmic soul, which comes between 
the Isvara and the soul of man. This Hiranyagarbha is 
looked upon as related to the universe in the same way as 
the individual soul is related to its body. We see here 
the influence of the Rg-Veda. The world is supposed to 
have a consciousness and a will. Mind always goes with 
body, vaster orders of mind accompanying vaster orders 
of body. The world in which we live has its own mind, 
and this mind is Hiranyagarbha. This conception of world 
soul appears in the Upanisads under various names and 
forms. It is called Karya Brahma, or the effect God, the 
Brahma of Natura Naturata, as distinguished from the 
Karana Brahma or the Causal God of Isvara, or the natura 
naturans. This effect God is the totality of created exist- 
ences of which all finite objects are parts. The conscious 
totality of all effects is Brahma or Hiranyagarbha. It is 
not radically different from the Brahman. Brahman is 
the simple, individual, absolutely self-identical. One, 
without a second. Once He is looked at as the creator or 
Isvara, again as the Created or Hiranyagarbha. Even 
this Brahma comes from the Brahman 1 — “ He is the source 
of Brahma ” ; the entire objective universe is sustained 
by this knowing subject. While the individual subjects 
pass away, he lives contemplating the w’orld. When we 
identify the Atman with our body. Brahman becomes the 
Cosmos or the Virat. Virat is the all, the hypostasisation 
of the conception of the world as a whole. It is the totality 
of things, the sum of all existence. “ This is he, the internal 
Atman of all created things whose head is Agni, whose eyes 
are the sun and the moon, whose ears are the four directions, 
whose speech is the Vedas which have emanated from Him, 
whose breath is Vayu, whose heart is all the universe, and 
from whose feet the earth proceeded .” 2 The body of the 
Virat is made of the material objects in their aggregate. 
He is the manifested God whose senses are the directions, 
whose body is the five elements, and whose consciousness 
glows with the feeling “ I am all.” Prior to the evolution 
of the Virat must have occurred the evolution of the Sutrat- 

1 Mundaka, iii. 13. I, * BIui)daka, iv 4. u. 



172 


INDIAN PHILOSOPHY 


man, the cosmic intelligence or Hiranyagarbha, having for his 
vehicle the totality of subtle bodies. Virat comes into being 
after Hiranyagarbha. In the form of Virat, Hiranyagarbha 
becomes visible. Till the effect is evolved, this Sutratman is 
consciousness associated with the subtle body (suksma sarira). 
He abides as a mere potentiality of intelligence and motion 
(Vijnana and Kriya) in the first cause. The Virat is the uni- 
versal self manifested in the gross physical matter of the world, 
Brahma is the same manifested in the subtle matter of the 
universe. The Sutratman is Hiranyagarbha, The supreme 
self beyond cause and effect is the Brahman, but when it 
becomes self-conscious with a non-ego opposed to it we have 
the Hvara. 1 * 3 4 The following table suggests the scheme: — 

Subject {Atman). Object {Brahman). 

1. The bodily self (Vi 4 va). i. Cosmos (Virat or Vaisvanara). 

2. The Vital self (Taijasa). 2. The soul of the world (Hira- 

nyagarbha) . 

3. The intellectual self (Prajna). 3. Self-consciousness (Hvara). 

4. The intuitive self (Turfya). 4. Ananda (Brahman). 

If a logical account is permitted, then we may say that 
the Brahman of the Upanisads is no metaphysical ab- 
straction, no indeterminate identity, no void of silence. 
It is the fullest and the most real being. It is a living 
dynamic spirit, the source and container of the infinitely 
varied forms of reality. The distinctions, instead of being 
dissolved away as illusory, are transfigured in the highest 
reality. The syllable “ aum,” generally employed to repre- 
sent the nature of Brahman, brings out its concrete character. 1 
It is the symbol of the supreme spirit, the “ emblem of the 
most high.” 3 “ Aum ” is the symbol of concreteness as well 

as completeness. It stands for the three principal qualities 
of the supreme spirit personified as Brahma, Visnu and 
Siva in later literature. “ A ” is Brahma the creator, “ U ” 
is Visnu the preserver, and “ M ” is Siva the destroyer.4 

1 In the susupti condition we have the subject self with the object 
world suppressed, though not abolished. 

* Aum is only the sign of the Eternal spirit, the thing signified even as 
an idol signifies Visnu “ pratimeva Visnoh ’’ (Samkara Comm., Tait., i. 6). 

3 Manu., ii. 83; see also Tail., i. 7; Kafha, i. 2. 15-16. 

4 See Chan., i. 3. G-7. Brh. Up., ii. 3. 1. and viii. 3. 4-5. 



PHILOSOPHY OF THE UPANISADS 173 


The La Upanisad asks us to worship Brahman both in 
its manifested and unmanifested conditions. 1 It is not an 
abstract monism that the Upanisads offer us. There is 
difference but also identity. Brahman is infinite not in 
the sense that it excludes the finite, but in the sense that 
it is the ground of all finites. It is eternal not in the sense 
that it is something back beyond all time, as though there 
were two states temporal and eternal, one of which superseded 
the other, but that it is the timeless reality of all things in 
time. The absolute is neither the infinite nor the finite, 
the self or its realisation, the one life or its varied expressions, 
but is the real including and transcending the self and its 
realisation, life and its expression. It is the spiritual spring 
which breaks, blossoms and differentiates itself into number- 
less finite centres. The word Brahman means growth, and 
is suggestive of life, motion and progress, and not death, 
stillness or stagnation. The ultimate reality is described 
as sat, cit and ananda — existence, consciousness, and 
bliss. “ Knowledge, power and action are of its nature." 
It is self-caused. 2 Taittiriya says Brahman is existence, 
consciousness and infinity. It is a positive reality, “ Full 
is that, full is this.” 3 It is obvious that the ultimate 
reality is not thought, or force, or being exclusively, but 
the living unity of essence and existence, of the ideal and 
real, of knowledge, love and beauty. But as we have 
already said, it can only be described negatively by us, 
though it is not a negative indeterminate principle. 

X 

Intellect and Intuition 

The ideal of intellect is to discover the unity which 
comprehends both the subject and the object. That there 
is such a unity is the working principle of logic and life. To 
find out its contents is the aim of philosophic endeavour. 
But the enterprise is doomed to disappointment on account 
of the inherent incapacity of intellect to grasp the whole. 

* Ubhayam saha, both together. * Svayam-bhu Isa, vii. 

• Brh., v. i. i. i. 



174 


INDIAN PHILOSOPHY 


Intellect, with its symbols and shibboleths, creeds and con- 
ventions, is not by itself adequate to the grasp of the real, 
“ from which all speech with the mind turns away unable 
to reach it.” 1 * “ The eye does not go thither, nor speech 

nor mind. We do not know. We do not understand how 
any one can teach it.” 3 * * The ultimate reality cannot be 
made into an objective representation which the intellect 
can grasp. “ How should he know him by whom he 
knows all this ? How, 0 Beloved, should he know himself 
the knower.” 3 Objective knowledge of the subject is im- 
possible. It is “ unseen but seeing, unheard but hear- 
ing, unperceived but perceiving, unknown but knowing.” * 
Atman is not non-existent, simply because it cannot be 
objectively represented. Though man’s intellectual capacities 
are not adequate for its comprehension, still they will have 
no existence but for it. 5 “ That which one cannot think 
with the mind, but that by which they say the mind is 
made to think, know that alone to be the Brahman.” 6 
Intellect works with the categories of space, time, cause 
and force, which involve us in deadlocks and antinomies. 
Either we must postulate a first cause, in which case 
causality ceases to be a universal maxim, or we have an 
endless regress. The puzzle cannot be solved by intellect, 
pure and simple. It must confess itself to be bankrupt 
when ultimate questions arise. “ The gods are in Indra ; 
Indra is in the Father God, the Father God is in Brahma, 
but in what is Brahma? ” and Yajnavalkya answers: "Ask 
not too much.” 7 Our intellectual categories can give 
descriptions of the empirical universe under the forms of 
space, time and cause, but the real is beyond these. While 
containing space, it is not spatial ; while including time, 
it transcends time ; while it has a causally bound system 
of nature within it, it is not subject to the law of cause. 
The self-existent Brahman is independent of time, space 


1 Taittinya, ii. 4. 

* Kena, ii. 3 ; Mundaka, ii. 1 ; see Katha, i. 3. 10. 

3 Brh., ii. 4. 13 ; see also iii. 4. 2. 

♦ Brh., iii. 7. 23 ; see iii. S. n. 

3 See Bj-h., iii. 8. 11 ; ii, 4, 14; iv. 5. 15. 

• Kena. 7 Bfh., iii. 6. t. 



PHILOSOPHY OF THE UPANISADS 175 


and cause. The space independence is brought out crudely 
in the Upanisads. Brahman is said to be omnipresent, 
all-pervading, infinitely great and infinitely small. “ That 
which is above the heaven, 0 Gargi, and that which is 
beneath the earth, that which men call the past, present 
and future, all that is woven within and throughout in 
space. But wherein then is space woven within and with- 
out ? In truth, in this imperishable one, is space woven 
within and throughout, 0 Gargi.” 1 Brahman is described 
as being free from the limitations of time. It is viewed 
as an eternity without beginning and end, or as an instan- 
taneous duration occupying no definite time interval. He 
is independent of past and future, 2 and lord of all, 3 at 
whose feet time rolls along. 4 In emphasising the independ- 
ence of causal relations Brahman is represented to be an 
absolutely static being, free from all the laws of becom- 
ing of which the universal rule is causality. This way of 
establishing Brahman’s independence of causal relations 
countenances the conception of Brahman as absolute self- 
existence and unchanging endurance, and leads to mis- 
conceptions. Causality is the rule of all changes in the 
world. But Brahman is free from subjection to causality. 
There is no change in Brahman though all change is based 
on it. There is no second outside it, no other distinct 
from it. We have to sink all plurality in Brahman. 
All proximity in space, succession in time, interdependence 
of relations rest on it. The comprehension of this profound 
philosophic synthesis cannot be obtained so long as we 
remain at the level of intellect. The Upanisads assert 
sometimes that thought gives us imperfect, partial pictures 
of reality, and at other times that it is organically incapable 
of reaching reality. It deals with relations and cannot 
grasp the relationless absolute. But there is nothing on 
earth existing in space or time which is not an appearance 
of the absolute. No knowledge is entirely false, though 
none is entirely true. The nearest approach to truth is 
the conception of an organised whole, though it is not 
completely true on account of the relational character which, 

* Brh., iii. 8. 7 ; see also iv. 2. 4 ; Chan., iii. 14. 3, and viii. 24. 7. 

• Katfia, ii. 14. « Bfh., iv. 4. 15. * iv - 4 - i 6 * * 7 - 



176 INDIAN PHILOSOPHY 

however near to cancellation it may have come, is never 
absolutely abolished. It is the highest form of the absolute 
the mind of man can hit upon. Intellect, in the sense of 
mere understanding, working with the limited categories of 
time, space and cause, is inadequate. Reason also fails, 
though it takes us beyond understanding. It does not help 
us to attain reality, which is not merely an idea but a spirit. 
An idea of reason is an imperfect fragment of reality which 
is more than idea. The real is neither true nor false. Our 
judgments about the real may be true or false, since they 
imply the dualism between idea and reality. We have to 
pass beyond thought, beyond the clash of oppositions, 
beyond the antinomies that confront us when we work 
with the limited categories of abstract thinking, if we are 
to reach the real where man’s existence and divine being 
coincide. It is when thought becomes perfected in 
intuition that we catch the vision of the real. The 
mystics the world over have emphasised this fact. Pascal 
dwells on the incomprehensibility of God, and Bossuet 
bids us not to be dismayed by the divergencies, but regard 
them all trustfully as the golden chains that meet beyond 
mortal sight at the throne of God. 

According to the Upanisads there is a higher power 
which enables us to grasp this central spiritual reality. 
Spiritual things require to be spiritually discerned. The 
Yoga method is a practical discipline pointing out the 
road to this realisation. Man has the faculty of divine 
insight or mystic intuition, by which he transcends the 
distinctions of intellect and solves the riddles of reason. 
The chosen spirits scale the highest peak of thought and 
intuit the reality. By this intuitive realisation “ the urn 
heard becomes heard, the unperceived becomes perceived, 
and the unknown becomes known.” 1 The problems raised 
by intellect solve themselves the moment we transcend 
reasoning and start to live the religious life.* The Upani- 
sads ask us therefore to lay aside our pride of intellect 
and self-consciousness, and approach facts with the fresh 
outlook of a child. “ Let a Brahmin renounce learning 

* Chandogya, vi. 13 ; see also Brh. ii. 4. 5, 

• Mundaka, iii. 1. 8. 



PHILOSOPHY OF THE UPANISADS 177 

and become as a child.” 1 No man shall enter into the 
kingdom of God except he first become as a little child. 
The highest truths are to be felt by the simple and pure- 
minded, and not proved to the sophisticated intellect. 
” Let him not seek after many words, for that is mere weari- 
ness of tongue.” * “ Not by learning is the Atman attained, 
not by genius and much knowledge of books.” 3 It is attained 
by the mystics in their moments of illumination. It is 
direct knowledge or immediate insight. In the mystic 
experience the soul finds itself in the presence of the highest. 
It is lost in awareness, contemplation and enjoyment of 
the ultimate Reality. It does not know what it is when 
it reaches it. There is nothing higher than it. Other 
things are all in it. It then fears no evil, no untruth, but 
is completely blessed. This spiritual vision relieves us 
from all passion and suffering. The soul in its exaltation 
feels itself to be at one with what it sees. Plotinus says : 
“ In the vision of God, that which sees is not reason, but 
something greater than and prior to reason, something 
presupposed by reason, as is the object of vision. He who 
then sees himself, when he sees, will see himself as a simple 
being, will be united to himself as such, will feel himself 
become such. We ought not even to say that he will see, 
but he will be that which he sees, if indeed it is possible 
any longer to distinguish seer and seen, and not boldly to 
affirm that the two are one. He belongs to God and is 
one with Him, like two concentric circles ; they are one 
when they coincide and two only when they are separated.” 4 
All the aspirations of the human mind, its intellectual 
demands, its emotional desires, and its volitional ideals 
are there realised. It is the supreme end of man’s effort, 
the termination of personal life. “ This is the supreme 
end of that, this is the supreme treasure of that, this is 
the supreme dwelling of that, this is the supreme joy of 

1 Brh., iii. 5. 1. This translation is adopted by Deussen and Gough, 
though Max Muller translates thus : " Let a Brahmin after he has done 
with learning wish to stand by real strength." This rests on the inferior 
reading of balyena in lieu of balyena ; " tasmad brahmanah pandityam 
nirvidya balyena tisthaset." 

* Brh., iv. 4. 21. 

* Infe : Plotinus, vol. ii„ p. 140. 


I Katha, ii. 23. 



178 


INDIAN PHILOSOPHY 


that.” 1 It is on a level with perceptual experience, but, 
unlike the latter, it is not objective and verifiable by others. 
It cannot, like inferential knowledge, be communicated to 
others. It is impossible to give a formal exposition of it. 
The mystic insight is inarticulate. As to a man born blind 
we cannot explain the beauty of a rainbow or the glory 
of a sunset, even so to the non-mystic the vision of the 
mystic cannot be described. " God put it into my head, 
and I cannot put it into yours,” is the last word of the 
mystic experience. Simply because it is incommunicable, 
it does not become less valid than other forms of know- 
ledge. We can describe this experience only by metaphors. 
For the light blinds us and makes us dumb. We cannot 
render a full report of the ineffable. Bahva, when asked 
by king Vaskali to explain the nature of Brahman, kept 
silent, and when the king repeated his request, the sage 
broke out into the answer: “ I tell it to you, but you do not 
understand it, Santo ’yam atma : this Atman is peaceful, 
quiet.”* To any suggested definitions of intellect we can 
only answer, it is not this, it is not this. 3 The negative 
definitions point out how the positive attributes known to 
us are inadequate to the highest. “ There is no measure 
of him whose glory verily is great.” “> Contradictory pre- 
dicates are attached to Brahman to indicate that we are 
obliged to use negative conceptions so long as we employ 
the dialectics of intellect, though positive features are 
revealed when Brahman is intuited. “ It is subtler than 
the subtle, greater than the great.” 5 " It moves, it does 

not move ; it is far and it is near ; it is within all this and 
without all this.” 6 These seemingly inconsistent accounts 
are not the sign of any confusion of thought. 

The absolute is implied in all experience, for every object 
of the world is based on the absolute, though none of them 
expresses it completely. So those who imagine they do not 

' Esasya parama gatih, esasya parama sampat, Eso'sya paramo lokah, 
eso’sya parama anandah. (Brh., iv. 3. 32.) 

z S.B. 111. 2. 17. 

3 See Brh., 111. 9. 26; iv. 2. 4.; iv. 4. 22.; iv. 5. 15; ii. 3. 6; Katha, 
iii. 15. Prasna, iv. 10; Chandogya, vii. 24. 1; Mundaka, 1. 1. 7; ii. 1. 2; 
in- 1. 7 8. 

4 Yaiur-Veda. 5 Svetasvatara, iii. 20; Kena. i. 3. <■ Isa, v. 



PHILOSOPHY OF THE UPANISADS 179 


know the absolute, do know it, though imperfectly; and those 
who think they know the absolute really do not know it 
completely. It is a state of half-knowledge and half- 
ignorance. The Kena Upanisad says: " It is unknown to 
those who know and known to those who do not know.” 1 
The Upanisads do not maintain that intellect is a useless 
guide. The account of reality given by it is not false. It 
fails only when it attempts to grasp the reality in its fullness. 
Everywhere else it succeeds. What the intellect investigates 
is not the unreal, though it is not the absolutely real. The 
antinomies of cause and effect, substance and attribute, 
good and evil, truth and error, subject and object, are due 
to the tendency of man to separate terms which are related. 
Fichte’s puzzle of self and not-self, Kant’s antinomies, 
Hume’s opposition of facts and laws, Bradley’s contradic- 
tions, can all be got over, if we recognise that the opposing 
factors are mutually complementary elements based on one 
identity. Intellect need not be negated, but has only to 
be supplemented. A philosophy based on intuition is not 
necessarily opposed to reason and understanding. Intuition 
can throw light on the dark places which intellect is not 
able to penetrate. The results of mystic intuition require 
to be subjected to logical analysis. And it is only by this 
process of mutual correction and supplementation that 
each can live a sober life. The results of intellect will be 
dull and empty, unfinished and fragmentary, without the 
help of intuition, while intuitional insights will be blind and 
dumb, dark and strange, without intellectual confirmation. 
The ideal of intellect is realised in the intuitive experience, 
for in the supreme are all contraries reconciled. Only by 
the comradeship of scientific knowledge and intuitive ex- 
perience can we grow into true insight. Mere reasoning 
will not help us to it. 2 If we content ourselves with the 
verdict of intellect, then we shall have to look upon the 
plurality and independence of individuals as the final word 
of philosophy. Competition and struggle will be the end 
of the universe Abstract intellect will lead us to false 
philosophy and bad morals. Brahman is concealed by 
such knowledge. 3 The unreflecting attitude is perhaps 

1 ii. 3. * Katha, ii. 9. » Mcdhaya pihitat?. Tait. Up. 



180 INDIAN PHILOSOPHY 

better than this kind of intellectualism. “ All who worship 
what is not knowledge enter into blind darkness ; those 
who delight in knowledge enter, as it were, into greater 
darkness.” 1 An intellectual knowledge of diversity with- 
out the intuitive realisation is worse than the blind ignorance 
of faith, bad as it is. The contradictions of life and logic 
have to be reconciled in the spirit of Emerson’s Brahma. 

They reckon ill who leave me out ; 

When me they fly I am the wings ; 

I am the doubter and the doubt. 

The one eternal spirit expresses, embraces, unifies and 
enjoys the varied wealth of the world with all its passions 
and paradoxes, loyalties and devotions, truths and contra- 
dictions. Weak souls, unaware of this all-embracing reality, 
grow weary of the fight, intellectual, aesthetic and moral. 
But they have to draw courage from the fact that the joy 
of harmony has to be derived from the struggle of discordant 
elements. The seeming contradictions belong to the life 
of spirit. The one spirit shows its being in all the opposi- 
tions of life and thought, the puzzles of Hume, the problems 
of Kant, the conflicts of empiricism and the dogmas of 
speculation. 

By insisting on intuition more than on thought, on 
ananda more than on vijnana, the Upanisads seem to 
support the non-dualism referred to in the Introduction. 
So long as we skim on the surface of reality with the notions 
of thought, we do not get at the deeper spirit. In ananda 
man is most and deepest in reality. In the unexplored 
depths of individual experience, the inner anandamaya, 
lies the stuff of reality. Intellectual systems disdain to 
descend into the rich mine of life. Whatever is reduced 
to vijnana has become unreal, though it tends to become 
universal and objective. What is not conceptualised or 
categorised is the truly subjective. The organised whole 
of vijnana gives a logical impress to identity. The intuition 
shows up the fact of identity. In trying to know' the identity 
we superficialise it by breaking it into differences and try 
to get them back to the identity by constructing a system. 

1 Brh., lv. 4-10 ; see Isa, ix. 



PHILOSOPHY OF THE UPANISADS 181 

But the fact once broken into the relations can never 
through mere logic have its oneness restored. As we have 
more than once observed, the first touch of logic is responsible 
for the transformation of the One into a system. 

XI 

Creation 

It is clear from our account of the nature of Brahman 
that the Upanisads are dissatisfied with the materialist 
and vitalist theories of evolution. Matter cannot develop 
life or consciousness unless it had the potentialities of them 
in its nature. No amount of shocks from the external 
environment can extort life out of mere matter. Ananda 
cannot be the end of evolution unless it was also the beginning 
of it. The end is present throughout, though in a suppressed 
form. The individual things of the world possess the 
features of their ultimate source and end. “ Whatever 
there is belonging to the son belongs to the father ; whatever 
there is belonging to the father belongs to the son.” 1 Every- 
thing in the world, not merely the human individual, is 
in essence the ultimate reality itself. Development means 
the manifestation of the potentialities of things by the 
removal of the obstructing energies. From the scientific 
point of view, we notice the different degrees of development 
in the things of the world. The philosopher is interested 
in the common ground of unity. The multiplicity of the 
world is based on the one spirit. “ Who indeed could live, 
who breathe, should not this ananda be in akaia ? ” * The 
sun rises punctually, the stars run in their courses, and all 
things stand in their order and faint not in their watches 
because of the eternal spirit which slumbers not nor sleeps. 
" All shine after Him who shines. By His radiance is all 
this illumined.” 3 Ananda is the beginning and the end 
of the world, the cause as well as the effect, the root as 
Well as the shoot of the universe. 4 The efficient and the 


1 Aitareya Aranyaka, ii. I. 8. i. 

* Tait., ii. 3 Mundaka, ii. 2. 10. 

4 Mala and tula. Aitareya Aranyaka ii. 1. 8. 1. 



182 


INDIAN PHILOSOPHY 


final causes are one. The matter with which the process 
of evolution starts is not an independent entity. It ha? 
hidden in it the highest ananda. The course of development 
is a transition from the potential to the actual. Matter 
has more potential in it than life. In the graduated scale 
of the types of existence, the later is the more evolved or 
the formed, and the earlier is the more potential or the 
unformed. To use the words of Aristotle, the earlier is 
the matter and the later is the form. Matter is the passive 
principle which requires to be energised or informed. We 
have in the logical accounts a god overlooking matter, 
stirring it up into motion. This god is prajnana, or the 
eternally active self-conscious reason. 1 He is responsible for 
the whole realm of change. The Upanisads fight shy of 
the conception of an omnipotent mechanic fashioning pre- 
existing matter into the universe. If God excludes matter, 
even though the latter is reduced to a mere potentiality, 
we cannot escape dualism, since God would remain opposed 
to matter. Such a dualism is the characteristic feature 
of the system of Aristotle with its distinction of the first 
mover and the first matter. For the Upanisads, both 
form and matter, the ever active consciousness and the 
passive non-consciousness, are aspects of a single reality. 
Matter itself is a god. 1 Its first forms of fire, water, and 
earth are looked upon as divine, since they are all informed 
by the one spirit. The Samkhya dualism is repugnant to 
the Upanisads. The transcendent reality is the ground 
or explanation of the struggle between spirit and matter. 3 
The whole world is conceived as possessing an identity of 
purpose as well as a common substratum of change. The 
Upanisads bring out in several fanciful and mythological 
accounts of creation the great truth of the oneness of the 
world. Brahman is the sole and the whole explanation 
of the world, its material and efficient cause. The entities 
of the world are knots in the rope of development, which 
begins with matter and ends in ananda. 

“ That created itself by itself.” 4 ” He creates the world 

1 Aitareya Aranyaka, i. 3. 3. 6. 

« Chin. vi. 8. 4-6. 1 Pra^na, i. 3. 

4 Tait. Up. See also Bfb., ii. 1. 20; Murnjaka, 1 . 1. 7 ; ii. 1. 1. 



PHILOSOPHY OF THE UPANISADS 188 

and then enters it.” 1 * 3 A personal god, Praiapati, tired of 
solitude, draws forth from himself everything that exists, 
or produces the world after having divided himself into 
two, one half male and the other half female.? Sometimes 
the personal or created being is represented as himself pro- 
ceeding from a material substratum. On other occasions, 
the primary substance of things is represented as manifesting 
itself in the created existence. 3 The Atman pervades things 
as the salt which has dissolved in water pervades the water ; 
from the Atman things spring as the sparks fly out from the 
fire, as threads from the spider, or sound from the flute. 4 
The theory of emanation where the bringing of a product 
into existence does not affect the source of the product is 
also suggested. The light coming from the sun leaves 
the sun unchanged. This seems to be the justification 
for the later theory that the individual is a mere abhasa or 
appearance of Brahman . The metaphors of the spinning of the 
web by the spider, the bearing of the child by the mother, the 
production of notes from musical instruments, attempt to 
bring out the intimate relationship between the cause and the 
effect. It is the tadatmya or oneness between Brahman and 
the world that is conveyed in all this wealth of symbol and 
image. The external world is not something separate, 
existing side by side with the Atman. The ultimate ground 
of being, Brahman, and the empirical state of being, the 
world are not different. The world of plurality can be 
reduced without residuum into the everlasting one. Brahman. 
The Upanisads are decisive about the principle that Brah- 
man is the sole source of life in all that lives, the single thread 
binding the whole plurality into a single unity. When the 
problem of the co-existence of the plurality and unity is 
taken up, the Upanisads speak in the language of similes 
and symbols, but do not give any definite answer. We 

1 Brh., iv. 7. 

* Brh., l. 2. 14. We have something similar to this in the Chinese doctrine 
of Yang and Yin. The primeval chaos is said to have been broken up by 
the antagonism of these two principles of expansion and contraction. The 
Yang is the male force in all creatures and the Yin is the female. Compare 
also the view of Empedocles. 

3 Ch 5 n„ iii. 39. 

* Chan., vii. 21. 2; vi. 2. 1 ; Brh., iv. 3; Mundaka, ii. 



184 


INDIAN PHILOSOPHY 


cannot in the absence of knowledge of Brahman dogmatise 
about the relation of the empirical world to Brahman. The 
two cannot be unrelated, for all that is, is one, and yet we 
do not know how precisely they are one. The former 
aspect is brought out in the argument that Brahman is 
the material as well as the efficient cause of the world ; 
the latter when it is said that we do not know anything 
of it at all. It is maya, or mysterious, or anirvacaniya 
(inexplicable), as Samkara puts it. We cannot ask how 
the relationless Brahman is related to the world. The 
presumption is that the world of relations does not in any 
way affect the nature of Brahman. The destruction of 
the world of experience does not in the least take away 
from the being of Brahman. Brahman can exist and does 
exist apart from the world of relations. The world is not 
an essential factor in the existence of Brahman. A reciprocal 
dependence of the world on Brahman and vice versa would 
be to reduce Brahman to the level of the world and subject 
it to the categories of time and purpose. The incapacity 
to define the relation of the absolute to the world is not 
to be construed as a repudiation of the world as a screen 
imagined by the finite man, which hides the absolute. For 
it is declared that the world of space, time and cause has 
its reality in Brahman. The absolute is so far present in 
this world of relations as to enable us to measure the distance 
of the things of the world from the absolute and evaluate 
their grades of reality. Brahman is in the w'orld, though 
not as the world. The Upanisads do not face the question 
directly. The only way to reconcile the several accounts 
is by taking our stand on the absolute self-sufficiency of 
Brahman. The perfection of Brahman implies that all 
the worlds, states and aspects, and all the manifestations, 
past, present and future, are realised in it in such wise 
that they are nothing without it, though it is independent 
of all other existence. If without conforming to the strict 
philosophical position, that we do not know the precise 
relation between the Brahman and the world, we proceed 
f o characterise it, it is truer to say that the world is the 
self-limitation of the supreme than that it is a creation of 
it. For the creation of the world by God would imply 



PHILOSOPHY OF THE UP AN ISADS 185 


that God was alone once upon a time, and at a certain 
point in His history He created the world. It is not right 
to look upon God as cause antecedent in time to the world 
as effect. It is better to make the world the expression 
of God. As a matter of fact, in many passages the Upani- 
sads declare that the world is only a development of 
the absolute spirit. Nature is a system of spontaneity 
or self-evolving autonomy, since it is the energising of the 
absolute. In this development, the first stage is represented 
by the rise of the two factors of a self-conscious God and 
the passive potentiality of matter. The ultimate fact is 
the self-sufficiency of Brahman, and we cannot say how the 
world is related to it. If we insist on some explanation, 
the most satisfactory one is to make the absolute a unity 
with a difference or a concrete dynamic spirit. We then 
reach the self and the not-self, which interact and develop 
the whole universe . 1 Self-expression becomes the essence 
of the absolute. Activity is the law of life. Force is 


* An attempt is made by Babu Bhagavan Das, in his translation of a 
work called Pranavavada, attributed to Gargyayana, to interpret a great 
saying of the Upanisads, aham etat na, " I not this,” into a highly philoso- 
phical doctrine. Aham or self is the self-conscious Isvara. Etat is nature 
or not-self. The relation between the two is signified by na, a negation. 
" The self is not the not-self ” In the syllable A UM, “ A ” represents the 
self, “ U ” the not-self, and “ M ” the negation of the two, but all these 
three are rolled into the '* AUM," the Prana va. The world is interpreted 
to be a negative reflection of the Aham. It is affirmed by the self for its 
own realisation. Etat is the unreal shadow, while Aham is the reality. 
The interpretation is ingenious ; but we have to remember that what is 
denied is not the Etat (not-self) as the reflexion of Aham (self) but only 
the Etat (not-self) as cut off from Aham (self). The many as separate 
and apart from the One is denied. Brahman the reality causes, if such a 
term is legitimate, all difference. In Indian thought this symbol AUM 
stands for many things. Every kind of trinity is represented by AUM. 
Being, non-being and becoming; birth, life and death; Prakrti, Jlvatman 
and Paramatman ; Sattva, Rajas and Tamas ; past, present and future ; 
Brahma, Visnu and 6iva. The conception of Brahma, Visnu and Siva 
emphasises the different aspects of the one Supreme, which contains the 
three conditions. God by a free act of His will creates, or more philosophically 
posits, an eternal universe. This positing God is Brahma. He views it, 
contemplates it, sustains it, enjoys it as being distinct from himself. This 
God is Visnu. He receives it back into his own unity as an indissoluble 
element of his being, then he is 6iva. Those who imagine that the three 
states are exclusive, postulate three personal agencies embodying the three 
different functions. 



186 INDIAN PHILOSOPHY 

inherent in existence. Maya, in the sense of energy, is 
potentially eternal in being. 

There is hardly any suggestion in the Upanisads that the 
entire universe of change is a baseless fabric of fancy, a mere 
phenomenal show or a world of shadows. The artistic and 
poet souls of the Upanisads lived always in the world of 
nature and never cared to fly out of it. The Upanisads 
do not teach that life is a nightmare and the world a barren 
nothing Rather is it pulsing and throbbing with the 
rhythm of the world harmony. The world is God’s revela- 
tion of Himself. His joy assumes all these forms.* But 
there is a popular view which identifies the Upanisad 
doctrine with an abstract monism, which reduces the rich 
life of this world into an empty dream. If we start with 
the facts of everyday experience and try to account for 
them, we are reduced to the two factors of a self-conscious 
Isvara and indeterminate matter. Intellectually we are 
convinced of the oneness of these two. Our difficulty is 
the reconciliation between the two : subject and object 
on the one hand, and the Brahman explicitly asserted by 
the Upanisads on the other. The real is one, yet we have 
the two. It is from this duality that the difference of the 
world arises. We are confronted with a blank wall. If 
philosophy is bold and sincere, it must say that the relation 
cannot be explained. The one somehow becomes two. 
This seems to be the most logical view in the circum- 
stances : “ The immanence of the absolute in finite centres 
and of finite centres in the absolute, I have always set 
down as inexplicable ... to comprehend it is beyond us 
and even beyond all intelligence.” 1 The inexplicabilty 
of the relation between the two is assumed by the Upanisads, 
and the later Vedanta gives to it the name of maya. 

The difficulty of giving a satisfactory explanation is 
traced to the imperfection of the human mind, which employs 
inadequate categories of space, time and cause, which are 

* Anandarupam amrtam yad vibhati. 

* Bradley : Mind, No. 74, p. 154. Cf. Green : “ The old question, why 
God made the world, has never been answered, nor will be. We know not 
why the world should be ; we only know that there it is." Prolegomena to 
Ethics, Sec. 100, 



PHILOSOPHY OF THE UPANISADS 187 

self-contradictory. The aspects of the world known to 
them are fragmentary and are not genuinely real. They 
are appearances somehow in and of, but not for reality. 
Everything we come across in our finite experience breaks 
down somewhere or other and becomes . contradictory. 
While all finite experiences are limited and incomplete, 
they are so in different degrees, and it is not right to put 
them all on a general level or give to them all equal reality 
or, more accurately, equal unreality. The doctrine of maya 
gives abstract expression to this general feature of all ex- 
perience of the finite that it falls short of the absolute. 

While intellectual modesty bom of the consciousness 
of human imperfection compelled the thinkers of the 
Upanisads to rest in negative statements of the supreme 
reality, the false imitators of the Upanisad ideal, with an 
extreme of arrogant audacity, declare that Brahman is 
an absolutely homogeneous impersonal intelligence — a most 
dogmatic declaration alien to the true spirit of the 
Upanisads. Such a positive characterisation of the nature 
of Brahman is illogical — for even Samkara says that the 
real is non-dual, advaita, and nothing positive. 

There are passages, according to Thibaut, “ whose 
decided tendency it is to represent Brahman as transcending 
all qualities, as one undifferentiated mass of impersonal 
intelligence .” 1 “ And as the fact of the appearance of the 
manifold world cannot be denied, the only way open to 
thoroughly consistent speculation was to deny at any rate 
its reality, and to call it a mere illusion due to an unreal 
principle, with which Brahman is indeed associated, but 
which is unable to break the unity of Brahman’s nature 
just on account of its own unreality.” 2 Maya, according 
to Thibaut, reconciles the appearance of diversity with the 
reality of the One, but unfortunately the conception of 
an abstract intelligence is a meaningless notion, which is 
disallowed by the anti-dogmatist attitude of the Upanisad 
theory. The Upanisads do not support an abstract con- 
ception of the ultimate reality. Their philosophy is not 
so much a monism as an advaitism (not twoness). The 
distinction of subject and object is not absolute, though 

* Introduction to V.S., p. furrlii, • Ibid., cxxv, 

VOL. I 7 



188 INDIAN PHILOSOPHY 

it is real in the world. We cannot split the world into 
two halves of subject and object, for Brahman underlies 
both. While it denies duality, it does not affirm that all 
things could be dissolved into one except in a figurative 
sense . 1 

Other friendly interpreters of the Upanisads also con- 
tend that the Upanisads support the doctrine of maya 
in the sense of the illusoriness of the world. Let us inquire 
into the value of their contention. Deussen, who has 
done much to popularise Vedantic lore in Europe, points 
out that four different theories of creation occur in the 
Upanisads. They are — (i) that matter exists from eternity 
independently of God, which He fashions, but does not 
create ; (2) that God creates the universe out of nothing, 

1 We find that the passages which employ the illustration of clay 
(copper, etc.) to explain the oneness of- Brahman and the world, use 
the words “ vacarambhanam vikaro namadheyam mrttikety eva satyam.” 
Its meaning seems to be that all are modifications of the one sub- 
stance, marked by different names. Samkara interprets this to mean that 
" the modification (vikara) originates and exists merely in speech ; in 
reality there is no such thing as effect. It is merely a name, and there- 
fore unreal." It is vyavaharikam or empirical, but it does not follow that 
it is mithya or falsehood. It has also to be noted that the statement is 
made by Uddalaka, who held a theory of matter which admitted only 
changes of form. The material, according to him, is one continuous whole, 
in which qualitatively distinct particles of matter are mixed together. The 
passage says that the development is noticed by the giving of a different 
name. Name and form are used in the Upanisads to indicate individuality. 
See Brh., i, 4. 7. Development of the one into the many is the rise of 
name and form out of the primary principle. There is no suggestion that 
the modifications denoted by name and form are unreal. They have, 
of course, no reality apart from Brahman. Namariipa is not what the 
English words name and form indicate. They correspond to the form and 
matter of Aristotle. The two together constitute the individuals of the 
world. In Buddhism rupa stands for the gross body and nama for the 
subtle mind. In the Upanisads the development of name and form means 
the individualisation of the One. The individualisation is the principle of 
creation, the central feature of the cosmic process. Things and persons are 
ultimately only modes of the existence of God. They are not real on their 
own account. Only Brahman is so real. Their separateness is superficial. 
Salvation in the Upanisads is the cessation of the sense of separateness of 
namariipa, The Mundaka Upanisad says : " He who has attained the 
highest wisdom unites with the universal spirit, delivered from namariipa as 
the flowing streams enter into rest in the sea, leaving namariipa behind." 
Again, the cause is more real than the effect. God is the cause of all 
persons and things. As gold is the essence of gold ornaments. Brahman is 
the reality of the world, its sattasamanya or common substiatum. 



PHILOSOPHY OF THE UPANISADS 189 


and the latter is independent of God, although it is His 
creation ; (3) that God creates the universe by trans- 
forming Himself into it ; (4) that God alone is real, and 
there is no creation at all. The last, according to him, is 
the fundamental view of the Upanisads. The world in 
space and time is an appearance, an illusion, a shadow of 
God. To know God we must reject the world of appear- 
ance. What inclines Deussen to this view is his own belief 
that the essence of every true religion is the repudiation 
of the reality of the world. Having come to that conclusion 
on independent grounds, he is anxious to find support for 
his doctrine in the philosophic systems of ancient India, 
the Upanisads and fsamkara, ancient Greece, Parmenides 
and Plato, and modern Germany, Kant and Schopenhauer. 
In his eagerness to find support for his position he is not 
very careful about the facts. He admits that the prevailing 
doctrine of the Upanisads is the pantheistic one, while 
the “ fundamental ” doctrine is the illusion hypothesis. 
That the pantheistic view is the “ prevailing ” one, Deussen 
is obliged to concede by the mere pressure of facts. That 
the illusion view is the “ fundamental ” one is his own 
reading of the facts. Between the two, the fact of pantheism 
and the reading of illusionism, a compromise has to be effected. 
Deussen achieves it by holding that it is a concession to 
clamour and the empirical demands of the unregenerate 
man. “ For the fundamental thought, that is held fast 
at least as a principle at all stages, even at the lowest, which 
maintains the independent existence of matter, is the con- 
viction of the sole reality of the Atman ; only that side by 
side with and in spite of this conviction, more or less far 
reaching concessions were made to the empirical conscious- 
ness of the reality of the universe, that could never be 
entirely cast off.” 1 The first argument urged in support of 
the “ illusion ” hypothesis is that the Upanisads assert 
the sole reality of Brahman. It follows that the world is 
unreal. We agree that Atman is the sole reality. If we 
know it, all else is known. That there is no plurality, no 
change outside it, is admissible. But that there is no change 
at all and no plurality at all, either in or out, such an un- 

* The Philosophy of the Upanisads, pp. 161-* 



190 INDIAN PHILOSOPHY 

qualified proposition is hard to understand. “ Nature,” 
says Deussen, “ which presents the appearance of plurality 
and change is a mere illusion.” 1 In the same strain 
Mr. Fraser argues : “ This doctrine of the illusion of all 
appearances of reality follows naturally and logically from 
the repeated teachings in the Upanisads regarding the 
non-duality of the self or Atman or Brahman as the sole 
reality of the universe.” 1 In these arguments the infinite 
is taken in a false sense. It is equated with the not -finite ; 
the eternal is made the not-temporal. When the eternal 
becomes a timeless abstraction, the life of the world in 
time becomes unreal. The opposition between the world 
in space and time and the world absolute and eternal is 
ultimate. But the Upanisads nowhere say that the infinite 
excludes the finite. Wherever they assert that Brahman 
is the sole reality they are careful enough to add that the 
world is rooted in Brahman, and as such has a share of 
reality. “The finite is in the infinite. This Atman is the 
entire universe.” 3 It is prana. It is speech. It is mind. 
It is everything in the universe. God is present in the 
vile dust and the small mote.4 The affirmation of the 
real involves the affirmation of all that is based on it. From 
the doctrine of the sole reality of Brahman follows the 
relative reality of what is included in or based on it. 

Deussen urges that “ the passages which declare that 
with the knowledge of the Atman all is known, ‘ deny ' 
the universe of plurality.” We do not admit this conten- 
tion. If the Atman is the universal self embracing within 
it all thinking things and the objects of all thought, if 
there is nothing outside it, then it follows that if it is 
known all else is known. The true knowledge which 
leads us to liberation helps us to realise the one indwell- 
ing spirit. There is no suggestion that the Atman 
and the world exclude each other ; in that case what 
Indra said to Prajapati would be true, and Atman 
which excludes everything definite and distinct, would be 

, P. 237. * Indian Thought, p. 68. 5 Chandogya, ii. 4. 26. 

« fllundaka, ii. 2. u ; Katha, ii. 5. 2; Tait., iii. 1 ; Chan., in. 14. 1. 
ii. 14. 2-4 ; vi. 9. 1 ; Brh., ii. 4. 6 ; iv. 5. 7 ; ii. 5. 2 ; v. 3. 1 ; i. 4. 16; 
ii. 5. 15; iii. 7. 15; iv. 4. 23; 



PHILOSOPHY OF THE UPANISADS 191 


the barest abstraction. If we ignore differences, we reduce 
the absolute to a non-entity. We do not improve the case 
of the absolute by repudiating the relative. The eternal 
need not give away the temporal as null and void. Loyalty 
to the highest experience of man, religious and moral, 
philosophic and aesthetic, requires us to recognise the reality 
of the temporal as rooted in the eternal, of the finite as 
subsisting in the infinite, of man as born from God. To 
deny the contingent and the individual is to falsify the neces- 
sary and the universal. The many passages which declare 
the world to be rooted in Brahman are explained away 
by Deussen as a concession to empirical consciousness. 
The Upanisads would not have seriously put forth doctrines 
about the relativity of the world if it was their view that 
the world was a mere illusion. An unworkable interpre- 
tation is adopted by Deussen, and arbitrary arguments are 
employed to support what is fundamentally unsound. 
Deussen himself, in attempting to give the credit for the 
“ illusion ” hypothesis to the great German philosopher 
Kant, admits that the hypothesis was not really, or perhaps 
explicitly, held by the Upanisad thinkers. For he writes : 
“ There is still always a broad distinction between the one 
Brahman and the multiplicity of his appearances, nor were 
ancient thinkers, or indeed any thinkers before Kant, 
able to rise to the conception that the entire unfolding 
in space and time was a merely subjective phenomenon .” 1 
Deussen correctly suggests that the Upanisads could not 
have held the view of the subjectivity of the world. The 
different theories of creation are enunciated just to point 
out that there is essential dependence between Brahman 

1 P. 103. Deussen seems to interpret Kant in the light of the Upanisads 
and the Upanisads in the light of Kant, with the result that he has prac- 
tr ally misconstrued both. Kant is anxious that his idealism should not be 
confused with 1 ierkcley an subjectivism quite as much as fsamkara is anxious 
that his idealism should not be identified with Buddhistic subjectivism. 
Perhaps with Schopenhauer Deussen thinks that Kant's refutation of 
idealism is a stupid after-thought and a great blunder. It is doubtful 
whether students of Kant would agree with Deussen’s view. The weli- 
known argument of Kant also, which bases immortality on the realisation 
of the moral law implanted in us, a result only attainable by an infinite 
process of approximation, tells not for immortality in the usual sense, but 
for transmigration" (p. 314). 



192 INDIAN PHILOSOPHY 

and the world. There are passages, we admit, which declare 
that the variegated universe is due to the development of 
name and form from out of the one absolute. These indi- 
cate only that the fundamental essence of all things is the 
one reality, and if we are lost in the name and form world, 
we run the risk of missing the deep-lying essence which 
gives rise to all the variety. This name and form-world 
hides, so to say, the immortal essence . 1 We have to pierce 
behind the veil which surrounds all mortal things. The 
objects in space and time conceal the essence of things. 
The passing semblance of life is in no wise its immortal 
truth. The real being is above these things. He manifests 
himself through the world. The manifestation is at the 
same time a concealment. The more complete is the mani- 
festation, the more is the reality concealed. God hides 
Himself and manifests Himself by drawing a veil over His 
face. The hidden meaning of things is opposed to the 
testimony of the senses. The world, while it manifests His 
glory, conceals His pure absolute nature. The truth, the 
unique substance, the absolute void of phenomena and rid 
of limitations, is covered by the multiplicity and plurality 
of the created universe. The objects of the world, including 
the finite selves, imagine that they are separate and self- 
existent, and seem to be engaged in the work of self-main- 
tenance. They forget that they all spring from an identical 
source, from which they derive sustenance. This belief 
is due to maya or delusion. “ Each little leaf on a tree 
may very naturally have sufficient consciousness to believe 
that it is an entirely separate being, maintaining itself in 
the sunlight and the air, withering away and dying when 
the winter comes on — and there is an end of it. It probably 
does not realise that all the time it is being supported by 

* Brh., i. 6. 3. Amrtam satyena cchannam. The ambiguity of the 
word " sat” is responsible for much of the confusion of the Upanisad view 
of reahty. Sat in one sense means all that exists. The world of change 
and growth is " sat ’’ in this sense. Sat also stands for the reality that 
persists in the midst of all change, the immortal or the amrtam. The 
Taittiriya calls the former sat and the latter tyat. Since tyat is opposed to 
the existent sat, it is sometimes called asat or anrtam (Tait., ii. 6). ^ Usually, 
the permanent reality or Brahman is called sat and the world of change 
asat (Chan., vi. 1 . j ; iii 19, r). 



PHILOSOPHY OF THE UPANISADS 193 


the sap which flows from the trunk of the tree, and that 
in its turn it is feeding the tree too — that its self is the self 
of the whole tree. If the leaf could really understand itself, 
it would see that its self was deeply, intimately connected, 
practically one with the life of the whole tree.” 1 Below 
the separate wave crests of consciousness there is the un- 
fatliQined common depth of life, from which all spirits draw 
the springs of their being. If we look upon the objects as 
separate and self-existent, we erect a screen which shuts 
us fiom the truth. The falsely imagined self -subsistence 
of finite objects clouds the glow of heaven. When we 
penetrate beneath the second causes to the essence of all 
things, the veils fall apart and we see that the principle 
underlying them is the same as that which dw'ells in us. 
It is this need to go behind second causes to realise the 
truth of the oneness of things that is brought out in the 
dialogue between the father and the son in the Chandogya 
Upanisad (vi. io ff.). 

" Fetch me from thence a fruit of the Nyagrodha tree." " Here 
is one. Sir.” “ Break it.” “ It is broken, Sir." “ What do you 
see there ? " '* These seeds, almost infinitesimal." " Break one of 

them." " It is broken. Sir." “ What do you see there ? " " Not 

anything, Sir." 

The father said : " My son, that subtle essence which you do not 
perceive there, of that very essence this great Nyagrodha tree exists. 
Believe it, my son, That which is the subtle essence, in it all that exists 
has its self. It is the True. It is the seif, and thou, O Svetaketu, 
art it.” 

The father points out to the son some typical objects of 
nature in succession and exhorts him to realise the philo- 
sophical truth of the unity of life and the continuity of man's 
life with that of the universe. We cannot easily conceive 
this one realitjr which is concealed by the many objects. We 
are too worldly, too experienced, too serious about our- 
selves for that realisation. We live on the surface, cling to 
forms, worship appearance. 

Deussen ignores the central truth of the Upanisad 
philosophy when he holds that according to it “ the whole 
universe, all children, possessions and wisdom,” must “ vanish 

1 Edward Carpenter : Pagan and Christian Creeds, p. 30 u 



194 INDIAN PHILOSOPHY 

into the nothingness, which they really are.” 1 On this 
hypothesis it is necessary to explain away all those passages 
which declare Brahman, the sustainer of the universe, to 
be one with the psychical principle of the individual self, 
on the principle of accommodation. “ The same spirit of 
accommodation lies at the basis of the form assumed by 
the doctrine of Brahman as a psychical principle.” 2 “ The 

Upanisads find a peculiar pleasure in identifying the Atman 
as the infinitely small within us with the Atman as the 
infinitely great outside us.” 3 When we are in trouble, 
we have no more to bring in God, but only make concession 
to weak human nature. 

“ Metaphysical knowledge impugns the existence of any 
reality outside of the Atman, that is the consciousness. The 
empirical view, on the contrary, teaches that a manifold 
universe exists externally. From a combination of these 
antagonistic propositions originated the doctrine that the 
universe is real, and yet the Atman remains the sole reality, 
for the Atman is the universe.” 4 It is not easy to under- 
stand how the two propositions are antagonistic and the 
conclusion an irreconcilable compromise. When it is said 
that there is no reality outside Atman, it is meant that the 
Atman is the universal spirit or consciousness, including all 
else. When it is said that “ a manifold universe exists 
external to us,” the “ us ” refers to the empirical individuals 
who are limited by mind and body, possessing local habi- 
tations and temporal settings. Surely to such beings the 
world is real, being set over against them. The Atman we 
are in search of is not the object of knowledge but the 
basis of all knowledge. It is the presupposition of material 
and spiritual worlds alike. The thinking beings or jxvas, 
the psychological selves, are part of the world of nature. 
In that world they externally act on other beings and are 
acted on by them. But logically Atman is the condition 
of there being a world of related objects at all. All existence 
is existence for self. The world is beyond us as psycho- 
logical selves. It is there within the universal self. The 
conclusion states, the universe is real to us, for we are not 
yet perfect selves. Atman is the sole reality, and it includes 
1 P, i6S. * P. 1 71. ' P. 237. 4 P. 405. 



PHILOSOPHY OF THE UPANISADS 195 


the universe also. Any other position would be illogical. 
As empirical selves we are opposed by the world, limited 
by the objects. As our life, which is first opposed to matter, 
gradually absorbs and remoulds into itself the mechanical 
side of things, even so the subject has to transfigure the 
object. Then what was at the start external and objective 
becomes only a condition of the subject’s activity. This 
process goes on steadily till the subject completely dominates 
the object and becomes all in all. Then there would be 
no obstacle outside the subject, but till then the goal is 
not reached. The annulling of the opposition is the sign 
of spirit’s growth. The conclusion that the world is a mere 
appearance would follow if the individual subject, this 
particular link in the chain of evolution, bound by space 
and time, be looked upon as the absolute reality. If we, 
as we are, were Brahman, if we were the sole reality, then 
the world opposed to us would be a mere magic show. 
But the self asserted to be the sole reality is the perfect 
self, which we have yet to become. To that perfect self, 
which includes all that is within and without us, there is 
nothing opposed. It is a confusion between the finite self 
of man, with all its discord and contradiction, and the 
ultimate self of Brahman, that suggests to Deussen an 
imaginary antagonism which he tries to overcome by an 
artificial device. 

There are some passages which say that we ought not 
to see plurality (nana) in Brahman . 1 These passages try 
to indicate the oneness of the world. The emphasis is on 
the one infinite and not the many finites. In our waking 
life we imagine the opposition between the subject and 
the object to be real. Sober reflection tells us that the 
opposition is not ultimate. Duality of subject and object 
is not the ultimate truth. When it is said that duality is 
not all, that duality is not final, it does not mean that 
there is no duality at all, that there is no distinction or 
variety. It is this false view of one school of Buddhism 
that Samkara protests against. So long as we imagine 
the world to be due to something else than the absolute 
we are lost. It is the existence of a factor separate from 

1 See Brh., iv. 4. 19. 

7 * 


VOL. X 



196 


INDIAN PHILOSOPHY 


Atman that the Upanisads protest against. Arguing from 
the similes of salt and water, fire and sparks, spider and 
threads, flute and sound, employed by the Upanisads 
to represent the relation of Brahman to the world. Olden- 
berg says : " We can detect behind these similitudes by 
which men strove to bring the living power of the Atman 
in the universe near to their understanding, a conviction, 
though at the same time but a half-conscious conviction, 
of the existence of an element in things separate from 
the Atman. The Atman, says the Indian, pervades the 
universe, as the salt the water in which it has dissolved, 
but we may easily go on to add, as a complement to this, 
that although no drop of the salt water is without salt, 
the water continues, notwithstanding, to be something 
separately constituted from the salt. And thus we may 
infer the Atman is to the Indian certainly the sole actuality, 
light diffusing, the only significant reality in things, but 
there is a remainder left in things which he is not." It is 
against such a view that the repudiations of dualism are 
intended. The Upanisads make it clear that they do not 
mean to make the world of creation stand separate from 
the Atman. They seem to be clamourously insisting on 
the adequacy of the Atman to all experience. Unlike 
abstract idealism, the Upani?ad doctrine is distinguished 
by its resolute devotedness to fact. Its highest principle 
or God is the eternal spirit, 1 * * which transcends and includes 
the objective world 1 and the subjective man.3 In the 
highest state there is only one Brahman. “ We see nothing 
else, hear nothing else, know nothing else.” 4 In the supreme 
illumination of the soul 5 we feel the oneness of subject 
and object, the relativity of the world, the non-ultimate 
nature of the oppositions. “ There is neither day nor night 
remaining any more, no existence, no non-existence — only 
God alone." 6 St. Paul says : “ When that which is perfect 
is come, then that which is in part shall be done away.” 
Similarly Ruysbroeck: "The fourth mode is a state of 
emptiness made one with God in bare love and in divine 


1 Adhidaivam. 

a Adhyatmam. See Tait., i. 7. 

I Atmabuddhipraka-sa. 


* Adhibhutam. 

« Chan., vii. 23. 

4 SvetAsvatara, iv. iS. 



PHILOSOPHY OF THE UPANISADS 197 

light. ... So that a man forgetteth himself and knoweth 
neither himself nor God, nor any creature, nor aught else 
but love alone.” It is this integral oneness of intuitive 
experience that is indicated by all those passages which 
ask us to see no distinction in the highest. 

We admit that according to the Upanisads, plurality, 
succession in time, co-existence in space, relations of cause 
and effect, oppositions of subject and object, are not the 
highest reality. But this is not saying that they are non- 
existent. The Upanisads support the doctrine of maya only 
in the sense that there is an underlying reality containing 
all elements from the personal God to the telegraph post. 
Saihkara says: "That Atman is in the hearts of all living 
creatures, from Brahma to a reed.” The different grades 
of individuality are all broken lights of the one absolute. 
Maya represents at the conceptual level the self-distinction 
residing in the very heart of reality, propelling it to develop 
itself. The particular things are and are not. They have 
an intermediate existence. Measured by the perfection of 
the absolute, the unlimited fullness of the one reality, the 
world of plurality, with all its pain and disruption, is less 
real. Compared with the ideal of the supreme one, it is 
wanting in reality. Even if we look upon the persons and 
things of the world as shadows of a substance, still, so long as 
the substance is real, the shadows also have relative reality. 
Though the things of the world are imperfect representations 
of the real, they are not illusory semblances of it. The 
oppositions and conflicts which are in the foreground are 
relative modes of the absolute unity, which is in the back- 
ground. Duality and manyness are not the reality . 1 

The unreflecting consciousness hastily assumes that the 
finite world is absolutely real. This is not so. The forms 
and energies of the world are not final and ultimate. They 
themselves need explanation. They are not self-originated 
or self-maintained. There is something behind and beyond 
them. We must sink the universe in God, the finite in 
the infinite, the real of uncritical perception in the Brahman 
of intuition. There is no suggestion in the Upanisads 

1 That Is why the word "iva ” is used in some of the Upanisads. See 
Brh., ii. 4. 14 ; iv. 3. 7 ; iv. 4. 19. 



198 


INDIAN PHILOSOPHY 

that the objects which lie around us on every side in infinite 
space, to which by virtue of our bodily frames we all belong, 
are only apparitions. 

There has been much criticism of the theory of the 
Upanisads under the false impression that it supports 
the illusory nature of the world. It is contended that 
progress is unreal because progress is change, and change 
is unreal since time in which change occurs is unreal. But 
the whole charge is due to a misconception. It is true that 
the absolute is not in time, while time is in the absolute. 
Within the absolute we have real growth, creative evolution. 
The temporal process is an actual process, for reality mani- 
fests itself in and through and by means of the temporal 
changes. If we seek the real in some eternal and timeless 
void, we do not find it. All that the Upanisads urge is 
that the process of time finds its basis and significance in 
an absolute which is essentially timeless. For real progress 
this conception of the absolute is necessary. Without this 
all-comprehending absolute we cannot be certain that the 
flux of the universe is an evolution, that change is progress, 
and that the end of the world is the triumph of the 
good. The absolute guarantees that the process of the 
world is not chaotic but ordered ; that the development 
is not haphazard or the result of chance variations. Reality 
is not a series of disconnected states. Were it so, were 
there not an absolute, we should be landed in an endless 
process, which would have no plan or purpose underlying it. 
The unity of the absolute functions throughout the process 
of the evolution of the world. We are not impotently 
struggling to realise something which is not yet and can 
never be. In a sense the real is expressed at every moment 
of its history. Being and becoming, that which is and that 
which is to be, are identical. With such a view, the teaching 
of the Upanisads is in essential harmony. They do not 
support the doctrine of the world illusion. Hopkins says: 
“ Is there anything in the early Upanisads to show that 
the authors believed in the objective world being an illu- 
sion ? Nothing at all .” 1 

1 J.A.O.S., xxii., p. 385. Sir R. G. Bhandarkar holds that “ the opinion 
expressed by some eminent scholars that the burden of the Upanisad 



PHILOSOPHY OF THE UPANISADS 199 

XII 

Degrees of Reality 

So far as the absolute is concerned, there are no degrees 
at all. The conception of degrees has meaning only for 
the finite intelligence which distinguishes things. It has 
no ultimate value. When the manyness of the world is 
taken over into the one, the conception of degrees is trans- 
cended. In the metaphysical reality of the Upanisads 
we have no scale of reals. Yet it has significance in the 
world of experience. All progress in the world involves it. 
Any demand for advance and alteration in existence pre- 
supposes it. The approximation to the character of the 
real in the relative world of things is the test of the more 
or less of reality. We know enough of the ultimate to make 
use of it in this world. This view of the Upanisads is 
defended by Samkara. In reply to the dilemma. Is Brahman 
known or is it not known ?, if known, we need not inquire 
into its nature ; if not known, it will not be worth our while 
to inquire, Samkara says that reality as self is indubitably 
known. It posits itself in such sayings as " I question,” 
or “ I doubt.” That something is real is a self-evident truth, 
and it is its nature that we have to understand. This reality 
which we realise serves as the criterion to distinguish degrees 
in existence. The theory of the world illusion is inconsistent 
with the conception of degrees of reality. The Upanisads 
give us a hierarchy of different grades of reality down from 
the all-embracing absolute, which is the primary source 
as well as the final consummation of the world process. 
The different kinds of being are higher and lower manifesta- 
tions of the one absolute spirit. For nothing on earth 
stands alone, however relatively complete and self-subsisting 
it may appear. Every finite object holds within itself 
distinctions which point beyond. While the absolute is 
in all finite things and permeates them, the things differ 


teaching is the illusive character of the world and the reality of one soul 
only is manifestly wrong, and I may even say is indicative of an uncritical 
judgment” {Vaispavism, p. 2, /.«.). 



200 


INDIAN PHILOSOPHY 


in the degree of their permeability, in the fullness of the 
reflections they give forth. 

Not all parts like, but all alike informed 

With radiant light. . . . 

There is a richer revelation of reality in organised life than 
in brute matter, more in human society than in organised 
life. The rank of the categories as higher and lower is 
determined by the adequacy of their expression of reality. 
Life is a higher category than matter. Self-conscious 
thought is more concrete than mere consciousness. “ He 
who knows the gradual development of the self in him 
obtains himself more development. There are herbs and 
trees and all that is animal, and he knows the self gradu- 
ally developing in them. For in herbs and trees sap only 
is seen, but citta or consciousness in animated being. 
Among animated beings, again, the self develops gradually, 
for in some sap is seen (as well as consciousness), but in 
others consciousness is not seen, and in man, again, the self 
develops gradually, for he is most endowed with knowledge. 
He says what he has known, he sees what he has known. 
He knows what is to happen to-morrow, he knows the 
visible and the invisible worlds. By means of the mortal 
he desires the immortal — thus is he endowed. With regard 
to other animals, hunger and thirst are a kind of under- 
standing. But they do not say what they have known, 
nor do they see what they have known. They do not 
know what is to happen to-morrow, nor the visible and the 
invisible worlds. They go so far and no farther .” 1 
We see that though the same reality is seen “ in the star, 
in the stone, in the flesh, in the soul and the clod,” 
still it is seen more fully in living beings than in dead 
matter, in developing man than in the satisfied beast, in 
the spiritual life than in the intellectual . 3 In this process 

1 Aitareya Aranyaka, ii. 3. 1—5. 

* The Aitareya Upanisad alludes to the fourfold classification of jlvas 
into those born of uterus, jarayuja, like men and the higher animals; those 
born of egg, apijaja, like crows and ducks; those bom of moisture, svedaja, 
like worms and insects ; and those born of earth, udbhijja, like plants (in. 3). 
The classification proceeds on the mode of appearance of the different beings 
on earth. See also Manu, i. 43-46. Aristotle speaks of vegetable, animal 
and human souls. Leibniz classifies living beings into plants, animals and men. 



PHILOSOPHY OF THE UPANISADS 201 

of self-realisation or self-fulfilment the lowest is the earth. 
The Upanisad thinkers have advanced on the Vedic con- 
ception of a single element-water. Sometimes three ele- 
ments of fire, water and earth are admitted. 1 * The five 
elements of ether, air, fire, water and earth, are distinguished. 
" From that self (Brahman) sprang forth ether" (akasa) ; 
from ether air, from air fire, from fire water, from water 
earth. From earth herbs, from herbs food, from food seed, 
from seed man. Man thus consists of the essence of food.” 3 
In discussing the physical basis of life the author gives an 
account of the evolution of matter. The higher possesses 
the properties of the lower. Ether comes first, with the 
single property of sound. It is that through which we 
hear. From ether we proceed to air, whicn nas the property 
of ether, and in addition that of tangibility. It is that 
through which we hear and feel. From air comes fire. It 
is that by which we hear, feel and see. From fire we get 
to water. We can taste it also. From water comes earth, 
that by which we hear, feel, see, taste and smell. Though 
the science presupposed might appear to be fanciful at 
the present day, still there was a principle involved in the 
account. It is in the Upanisads that we have for the 
first time the doctrine of the five elements. The distinction 
of the elemental essence or the tanmatra and the gross 
embodiment or substance is suggested.3 The Chandogya 
Upanisad sometimes suggests that the things of the world 
are qualitatively distinct from one another, and may be 
divided into infinite parts. Uddalaka propounds the theory 
that matter is infinitely divisible and qualitatively distinct. 
There is no such thing as the transformation of things into 
one another. When we get butter from churning curds, 
curds do not get transformed into butter, but the particles 
of butter are already in the curds, and the process of churning 
enables them to rise upwards. 4 The position of Anaxagoras, 

1 By the combination of these three, all other bodies are formed. See 
Chandogya Up., vi. 2. 3-4. Possibly this view is the origin of the Samkhya 
doctrine of tanmatras or subtle essences, giving rise to gross substances. 
See also Prasna Up., iv. 8. 

1 Tait., ii. 1. 

3 See Prasna, iv. 8 ; Aitareya, ii. 3 ; Kafka, ii. 15 ; Prasna, vi. 4. 

< Chan., vi. 6. x. 



202 INDIAN PHILOSOPHY 

that different kinds of matter interpenetrate each other, 
is similar to this : “If then an empirical fact, such as th» 
assimilation of nutriment, appears to show us the conver- 
sion (say) of com into flesh and bone, we must interpret 
this as meaning that the corn contains in itself, in such 
minute quantities as to be imperceptible, just that into 
which it is transformed. It veritably consists of particles 
of flesh and blood, and marrow and bone.” 1 The atomic 
theory of Kanada is also suggested in the view that the 
particles only combine and separate. Matter is represented 
as a chaotic mass, like the juices of various trees blended 
together in honey.* It is not impossible to see in this the 
germs of the Samkhya theory. The development of matter 
is accounted for by either the entry of the jlvatman into 
matter or the animation of matter by spirit in varying 
degrees. Sometimes the principle of motion is located 
within matter itself. Prana or life, though it arises out of 
matter, is not fully explicable by matter. Similarly, con- 
sciousness, though it arises from life, is not intelligible on 
the hypothesis of prana or vitalism. When we get to man 
we have self-conscious thought. Man is higher than stones 
and stars, beasts and birds, since he can enter into the 
fellowship of reason and will, affection and conscience, 
yet he is not the highest, since he feels the pain of contra- 
diction. 

Before we pass from this section let us consider whether 
the Upanisad doctrine is rightly regarded as pantheistic. 
Pantheism is the view which identifies God with the sum 
of things and denies transcendence. If the nature of the 
absolute is exhausted completely by the course of the 
world, if the two become one, then we have pantheism. 
In the Upanisads we come across passages which declare 
that the nature of reality is not exhausted by the world 
process. The existence of the world does not take away 
from the perfection of the absolute. In a beautiful image 
it is said : “That is full and this is full. From that full 
rises this full. Taking away this full from that, what re- 
mains is yet full.” Even God in transforming Himself into 

i Adamson: The Development of Greek Philosophy, p. 50. 

• Chan., vi. 9. 1-2. 



PHILOSOPHY OF THE UPANISADS 203 


the world has forfeited nothing of His nature. As early 
as the Rg-Veda it is said that all beings are only a fourth 
of the Purusa, while the three other fourths remain im- 
mortal in the shining regions. 1 According to the Brhad 
aranyaka (v. 14), one foot of Brahman consists of the 
three worlds, the second of the triple knowledge of the 
Veda, the third of the three vital breaths, while the fourth, 
exalted above the dust of earth, shines as the sun. 2 The 
Upanisads declare that the universe is in God. But they 
never hold that the universe is God. God is greater than 
the universe, which is His work. He is as much and more 
beyond this, as the human personality is beyond the body, 
which is the instrument of its life here. They refuse to 
imprison God in the world. From this it does not follow 
that God is the external Creator existing separate from the 
world. God expresses Himself in the world, and the world 
is the expression of His life. God in the infinite fullness of 
His being transcends His actual manifestations in the 
universe of finite, physical and psychical entities which 
He has called into existence. God is transcendent as well 
as immanent. The Upanisads are not pantheistic in the 
bad sense of the term. Things are not thrown together 
into a heap called God, without unity, purpose or distinc- 
tion of values. The philosophy of the Upanisads revolts 
against the deistic conception of God. It does not say 
that God is outside the world, and now and again makes 
His presence felt by supernatural revelation or miraculous 
interference. It is pantheism, if it is pantheism to say 
that God is the fundamental reality of our lives, and we 
cannot live without Him. Everything on earth is finite 
and infinite, perfect and imperfect. Everything seeks a 
good beyond itself, tries to rid itself of its finiteness and 
become perfect. The finite seeks self-transcendence. This 
clearly establishes that the Infinite Spirit is working in the 
finite. The real is the basis of the unreal. If the doctrine 
of the indwelling of the divine is enough justification for 
condemning a system as pantheism, the philosophy of the 
Upanisads is a pantheism. But pantheism in this sense 
is an essential feature of all true religion. 

* x. 90. 3. See also Chandogya Up., iii. 12. 6. • iv. 3. 32. 



204 


INDIAN PHILOSOPHY 


XIV 

The Individual Self 

The Upanisads make out that of finite objects the 
individual self has the highest reality. It comes nearest 
to the nature of the absolute, though it is not the absolute 
itself. There are passages where the finite self is looked 
upon as a reflection of the universe. The whole world is 
the process of the finite striving to become infinite, and this 
tension is found in the individual self. According to the 
Taittiriya the several elements of the cosmos are found in 
the nature of the individual. In the Chandogya Upanisad 
(vi. ii. 3 and 4) fire, water and earth are said to constitute 
the jlvatman or the individual soul, together with the prin- 
ciple of the infinite. 1 

Man is the meeting-point of the various stages of reality. 
Prana corresponds to Vayu, the breath of the body to the 
wind of the world, manas to akasa, the mind of man to the 
ether of the universe, the gross body to the physical elements. 
The human soul has affinities with every grade of existence 
from top to bottom. There is in it the divine element 
which we call the beatific consciousness, the ananda state, 
by which at rare moments it enters into immediate relations 
with the absolute. The finite self or the embodied soul 
is the Atman coupled with the senses and mind. 1 

The different elements are in unstable harmony. “ Two 

• Since God collected and resumed in man 
The firmaments, the strata and the lights. 

Fish, fowl, and beast and insect — 

Of various life caught back upon His arm all their trains, 
Keorganised and constituted man. 

The microcosm, the adding up of works. 

Browning. 

See also Aitareya, iii. 3 ; 3 vetasvatara, ii. 12. 6 ; Prasna, vi. 11. The 
individual subject is the world in miniature, and the world is the individual 
writ large. Plato in his Timceus institutes an analogy between the macro- 
cosm and the microcosm, the universe and man. The soul of the world is 
said to be compounded by God Himself out of the changeless and the change- 
ful and inserted in the midst of the universe (34. B). The universe, according 
to him, is a magnified man. See Tait., i. 3, and Anandagiri’s com- 
mentary on it. 

» Chan., viii. 12. 3. 



PHILOSOPHY OF THE UPANISADS 205 


birds, akin and friends, cling to the self-same tree. One 
of them eats the sweet berry, but the other gazes upon 
him without eating. In the same tree — the world tree — 
man dwells along with God. With troubles overwhelmed, 
he faints and grieves at his own helplessness. But when 
he sees the other, the Lord in whom he delights — ah, what 
glory is his, his troubles pass away.” 1 The natural and 
the divine have not as yet attained a stable harmony. 
The being of the individual is a continual becoming, a 
striving after that which it is not. The infinite in man 
summons the individual to bring about a unity out of the 
multiplicity with which he is confronted. This tension 
between the finite and the infinite which is present through- 
out the world-process comes to a head in the human con- 
sciousness. In every aspect of his life, intellectual, emo- 
tional and moral, this struggle is felt. He can gain admission 
into the kingdom of God, where the eternal verities of 
absolute love and absolute freedom dwell only by sinking 
his individuality and transforming the whole of the finite- 
ness into infiniteness, humanity into divinity. But as finite 
and human, he cannot reach the fruition or attain the final 
achievement. The being in which the struggle is witnessed 
points beyond itself, and so man has to be surpassed. The 
finite self is not a self-subsisting reality. Be he so, then 
God becomes only another independent individual, limited 
by the finite self. The reality of the self is the infinite ; the 
unreality which is to be got rid of is the finite. The 
finite individual loses whatever reality he possesses if the 
indwelling spirit is removed. It is the presence of the 
infinite that confers dignity on the self of man. The indi- 
vidual self derives its being and draws its sustenance from 
the universal life. Sub specie ceternitatis, the self is perfect . 1 
There is a psychological side on which the selves repel each 
other and exclude one another. From this apparent fact 
of exclusiveness we should not infer real isolation of selves. 
The exclusiveness is the appearance of distinction. It 
ought to be referred to the identity, otherwise it becomes 
a mere abstraction of our minds. The hypothesis of ex- 

> Mu^itjaka, iii. i. 2. See R.V., i. 164. 20. 

4 See §amkara ; Introduction to V.S. 



206 


INDIAN PHILOSOPHY 


elusive selves leaves no room for the ideals of truth, goodness 
and love. These presuppose that man is not perfect as 
he is, that there is something higher than the actual self 
which he has to attain to secure peace of mind. “ And 
the independent reality of the individual, when we examine 
it, is in truth mere illusion. Apart from the community, 
what are separate men ? It is the common mind within 
him which gives reality to the human being, and taken 
by himself, whatever else he is, he is not human. ... If 
this is true of the social consciousness in its various forms, 
it is true certainly no less of that common mind which is 
more than social. The finite minds that in and for religion 
form one spiritual whole have indeed in the end no visible 
embodiment, and yet, except as members in an invisible 
community, they are nothing real. For religion, in short, 
if the one indwelling spirit is removed, there are no spirits 
left.” * 

Though the individual soul fighting with the lower 
nature is the highest in the world, it is not the highest 
realisable. The striving discordant soul of man should 
attain to the freedom of spirit, the delight of harmony 
and the joy of the absolute. Only when the God in him 
realises itself, only when the ideal reaches its fruition is 
the destiny of man fulfilled. The struggles, the contra- 
dictions and the paradoxes of life are the signs of imperfect 
evolution, while the harmony, the delight and the peace, 
mark the perfection of the process of evolution. The in- 
dividual is the battlefield in which the fight occurs. The 
battle must be over and the pain of contradiction trans- 
cended for the ideal to be realised. The tendency to God 
which begins in completed man will become then a perfect 
fruition. Man is higher than all other aspects of the uni- 
verse, and his destiny is realised when he becomes one 
with the infinite. Nature has life concealed in it, and 
when life develops, nature’s destiny is fulfilled. Life has 

consciousness concealed in it, and when it liberates con- 
sciousness, its end is reached. The destiny of consciousness 
is fulfilled when intellect becomes manifest. But the truth 
of the intellect is reached when it is absorbed in the higher 

» Bradley : Truth and Reality, p. 435. 



PHILOSOPHY OF THE UPANISADS ^207 


intuition, which is neither thought nor will nor feeling, 
but yet the goal of thought, the end of will and the per- 
fection of feeling. When the finite self attains the supreme, 
the godhead from which it descended, the end of spiritual 
life is reached. “ When to a man who understands, the 
self has become all things, what sorrow, what trouble, can 
there be to him, who has once beheld that unity ? ” 

XV 

The Ethics of the Upanisads 

In estimating the value of the ethics of the Upanisads 
we have to consider the logical implications of the ideal 
set forth, and develop the suggestions made in the texts. 
From our previous discussion, it is obvious that the Upani- 
sads have for their ideal the becoming one with God. 
The world is not for itself. It issues from God, and must 
therefore seek its rest in God. Throughout the process of 
the world we witness this infinitisation of the finite. Like 
the rest of the world, man, feeling the pressure of the infinite 
in him, reaches out his hands to clasp the highest. “ All 
birds go towards the tree intended for their abode, so all 
this goes to the supreme self.” 1 “ May I enter Thee, such 

as Thou art, O, Lord ; may Thou, 0 Lord, enter me. . . . 
May I become well cleansed, O Lord.” 2 “ Thou art my 

resting-place.” 3 The realisation of the oneness with God 
is the ideal of man. The difference between human con- 
sciousness and all else is that while all seek the infinite, 
man alone has an idea of the end. After ages of develop- 
ment man has become conscious of the great scheme of 
the universe. He alone feels the summons of the infinite, 
and consciously grows towards the heavenly stature awaiting 
him. The absolute is the deliberate goal of the finite self. 

That it is the highest perfection, the most desirable ideal, 
is brought out in many ways. It is a state “ far above 
hunger and thirst, above sorrow and confusion, above old 
age and death.” “As the sun, the eye of the universe, 

> Prasna, iv. 7. • Tait., i. 4. 

i Tait.. i. 4 ; see Brb., iv. 3. 32. 



208 INDIAN PHILOSOPHY 

remains far off and unaffected by all sickness that meets 
the eye, so also the One, the Atman, who dwells in all 
creatures, dwells afar and untouched by the sorrows of 
the world.” To live in the world of plurality, staking all 
on the small self, subject to disease and suffering, is indeed 
a misfortune. The undoing of the causes which lead to 
finite existence is the proper aim of man. A return from 
the plurality into the One is the ideal goal, the most ultimate 
value. It gives satisfaction to the whole being of man. 
It is, according to the Taittiriya Upanisad, “ Pranaramam 
mana-anandam, £antisamrddham amrtam,” " the delight 
of life and mind, the fullness of peace and eternity.” Lower 
goals which we crave after may satisfy the vital organism 
or the mental desires, but this includes them and transcends 
them. We have different kinds of pleasures answering to 
the different levels of our existence, the vital pleasure, 
the sensuous, the mental and the intellectual, but the 
highest is ananda. 

Whatever ethics we have in the Upanisads is subsidiary 
to this goal. Duty is a means to the end of the highest 
perfection. Nothing can be satisfying short of this highest 
condition. Morality is valuable only as leading to it. It 
is the expression of the spiritual impulse to perfection 
implanted in the heart of man, the instinct of the individual 
soul. It is obedience to the Eternal Reality which constrains 
our conscious self. This is the meaning of the expression 
that duty is “ the stern daughter of the voice of God.” 
The perfect ideal of our life is found only in the Eternal 
Reality. The law of morality is an invitation to become 
perfect, “ even as your heavenly Father is perfect.” 

Before we take up the discussion of the ethical life, we may 
consider the objections urged generally against the possi- 
bility of ethics in the philosophical system of the Upanisads. 
If all is one, it is asked, how can we have moral relations ? 
If the absolute is perfection, where is there any need for 
the effort to realise what is already accomplished ? But 
monism does not mean an obliteration of the distinction of 
good and evil. The sense of otherness and multiplicity 
essential to ethical life is allowed for by the Upanisads 
They point out that there is no meaning in asking us to 



PHILOSOPHY OF THE UPANISADS 209 

t 

love our neighbour or achieve the unity of the world in 
love, if exclusiveness and difference are fundamental in the 
lives of men. If men were really external to each other, 
as the Leibnizean monads, without the corrective of the 
pre-established harmony, then the ethical ideal is impossible 
of realisation. If we are called upon to love our neighbour, 
it is because all are one in reality. My neighbour and 
myself are one in our inmost self, if the superficial and 
ephemeral distinctions are transcended. The true self, 
absolutely and eternally valid, is beyond the fluctuating 
particulars of time and space and all that finds its place 
in them. It is no mere empty phrase to be told to transcend 
our exclusiveness. Moksa literally means release, release 
from the bondage to the sensuous and the individual, the 
narrow and the finite. It is the result of self-enlargement 
and freedom. To live in perfect goodness is to realise one’s 
life in all. This ideal for which the moral nature of man 
cries can be attained only if the finite self transcends its 
narrow individuality and identifies itself with the whole, 
The path of deliverance is the path of soul growth. The 
reality in which we are to abide by transcending our in- 
dividuality is the highest, and that is the reality asserted 
by the Upanisads. 

It is urged that there is no room for any ethical en 
deavour on the hypothesis that man is divine in nature 
Simply because it is said that God is in man, it does not 
follow that with it there is an end of all endeavour. God is 
not in man in such an obvious fashion that he can possess 
Him absentmindedly and without effort or struggle. God is 
present as a potentia or a possibility. It is man’s duty 
to lay hold of Him by force and action. If he does not 
do it, he fails in his duty as man The God in man is a 
task as well as a fact, a problem as well as a possession. 
Man in his ignorance identifies himself with the external 
wrappings, the physical and mental envelopments. Desire 
for the absolute conflicts with his finitude or his limitation. 
“ Though the individual is lit with the divine spark, he is 
not wholly divine. His divinity is not an actuality, but 
a part of God aspiring to be the whole. As he is, he is dust 
and deity, God and brute crossed. It is the task of the 



210 INDIAN PHILOSOPHY 

moral life to eliminate the non-divine element, not by des- 
troying it, but by suffusing it with the divine spirit .” 1 
Man is a contradiction between the finite heritage of nature 
and the infinite ideals of spirit, and by a gradual submission 
of the chaotic principles of nature to the divine spirit he 
has to work up to his destiny. It is his aim to break the 
shell of his own little being and blend in love and perfect 
union with the divine principle. The problem of morality 
has a significance for man whose life is a struggle or a war- 
fare between the finite and the infinite, the demoniac and 
the divine elements. Man is born for the struggle, and 
does not find his self until he feels the opposition. 

From the references in the Upanisads to the different 
ways of attaining the highest, Rathitara’s truth, Paurusisti’s 
austerity and Maudgalya’s learning,* it is clear that the 
thinkers of the period reflected a good deal on the problems 
of ethics. Without attempting to elaborate the views 
of the different thinkers, we may describe certain general 
propositions accepted by them all. 

The ideal of ethics is self-realisation. Moral conduct is 
self-realised conduct, if by the self we mean not the empirical 
self, with all its weakness and vulgarity, selfishness and 
smallness, but the deeper nature of man, free from all fetters 
of selfish individuality. The lusts and passions of the 
animal self, the desires and ambitions of egoism, restrict 
the vital energies to the plane of the lower self and contract 
the life of the soul, and they are to be held in check. For the 
growth of the soul, or the realisation of the highest, the 
obstacles and influences must be subdued. The moral 
life is one of understanding and reason, and not of mere 
sense and instinct. " Know the self or Atman as the Lord 
who sits in the chariot called the body, buddlii or intelli- 
gence is the charioteer, mind is the reins, the senses are 
the horses, and the objects are the roads. The self, the 
senses and the mind combined, the intelligent call the 
enjoyer. But he who has no understanding, but is weak 
in mind, his senses run riot like the vicious horses of a 
charioteer. He who has understanding, and is strong- 

* International Journal oj Ethics, 1914, p. 169. 

• Tait., i. 9. 



PHILOSOPHY OF THE UPANISADS 211 


minded, his senses are well controlled, like the good horses 
of a charioteer. He who is without understanding, who 
is thoughtless and impure, never reaches the immortal, 
immaterial state, but enters into the round of birth. But 
he who has understanding, and he who is thoughtful and 
pure, reaches the state from which there is no return.” 1 * 3 
The drive of desire has to be checked. When desire seizes 
the helm the soul suffers shipwreck, since it is not the law 
of man’s being. Tf we do not recognise the ideal prescribed 
by reason, and do not accept a higher moral law, our life 
will be one of animal existence, without end or aim, where 
we are randomly busy, loving and hating, caressing and 
killing without purpose or reason. The presence of reason 
reminds us of something higher than mere nature, and re- 
quires us to transform our natural existence into a human 
one, with meaning and purpose. If, in spite of indications 
to the contrary, we make pleasure the end of our pursuits, 
our life is one of moral evil, unworthy of man. “ Man is 
not in the least elevated above mere animalism by the 
possession of reason, if his reason is only employed in the 
same fashion as that in which animals use their instincts.” 1 
Only the wicked make gods of the things of the world and 
worship them. “ Now Virocana, satisfied in his thought, 
went to the asuras and preached to them the doctrine that 
the bodily self alone is to be worshipped, that it alone is 
to be served, and he who worships body and serves it gains 
both worlds — this and the next. Therefore they call even 
now a man who does not give alms here, who has not faith, 
and offers no sacrifices, an asura, for this is the doctrine 
of the asuras.” 3 Our life, when thus guided, will be at 
the mercy of vain hopes and fears. “ The rational life 
will be marked by unity and consistency. The different 
parts of human life will be in order and make manifest 
the one supreme ideal. If, instead of reason, our senses 
guide us, our life will be a mirror of passing passions and 
temporary inclinations. He who leads such a life will have 
to be written down, like Dogberry, an ass. His life, which 

1 Katha Upanisad. 

• Kant : Critique of Pure Reason. 

3 Chandogya, viii. 8. 4-5. 



212 INDIAN PHILOSOPHY 

will be a series of disconnected and scattered episodes, 
will have no purpose to take, no work to carry out, no end 
to realise. In a rational life, every course of action, before 
it is adopted, is brought before the bar of reason, and its 
capacity to serve the highest end is tested, and if found 
suitable adopted by the individual.” 1 

A life of reason is a life of unselfish devotion to the 
world. Reason tells us that the individual has no interests 
of his own apart from the whole, of which he is a part. 
He will be delivered from the bondage to fortune and 
caprice only if he gives up his ideas of separate sensuous 
existence. He is a good man who in his life subordinates 
personal to social ends, and he is a bad man who does the 
opposite. The soul in committing a selfish deed imposes 
fetters on itself, which can be broken only by the reassertion 
of the life universal. This way of sympathy is open to 
all and leads to the expansion of the soul. If we want 
to escape from sin, we must escape from selfishness. We 
must put down the vain conceits and foolish lies about 
the supremacy of the small self. Each of us conceives 
himself to be an exclusive unit, an ego sharply marked off 
from whatever lies outside his physical body and mental 
history. From this egoism springs all that is morally bad. 
We should realise in our life and conduct that all things 
are in God and of God. The man who knows this truth 
will long to lose his life, will hate all selfish goods and sell 
all that he has, would wish even to be despised and rejected 
of the world, if so he can come into accord with the universal 
life of God. In one sense the Upanisad morality is in- 
dividualistic, for its aim is self-realisation ; but “ individual- 
istic ” ceases here to have any exclusive meaning. To 
realise oneself is to identify oneself with a good that is not 
his alone. Moral life is a God-centred life, a life of passionate 
love and enthusiasm for humanity, of seeking the infinite 
through the finite, and not a mere selfish adventure for 
small ends.* 

Finite objects cannot give us the satisfaction for which 
aur soul hungers. As in the field of intellect we miss the 
ultimate reality in the objects of the empirical world, even 

! International Journal of Ethics, 1914, pp. 171-*. * l£a Upanisad, 1. 



PHILOSOPHY OF THE UPANISADS 213 


so the absolute good we seek for in morality is not to be 
found in finite satisfactions. “ The infinite is bliss, there 
is no bliss in things finite." 1 Yajnavalkya, leaving for 
the forest, proposed to divide his property between his 
two wives, Maitreyi and Katyayanl. Maitreyi did not 
know what to do ; sitting among her household possessions, 
rather sadly she was looking outwards towards the forest. 
That day she administered a rebuke to the petty man who 
pursues worthless aims in such breathless haste. Finite 
things produce the opposite of what we aim at through 
them. The spirit in us craves for true satisfaction, and 
nothing less than the infinite can give us that. We seek 
finite objects, we get them, but there is no satisfaction 
in them. We may conquer the whole world, and yet we 
sigh that there are no more worlds to conquer. " What- 
ever he reaches he wishes to go beyond. If he reaches the 
sky, he wishes to go beyond.” a Most of us are on " the 
road that leads to wealth in which many men perish.” s 
By becoming slaves to things, by swathing ourselves in 
external possessions, we miss the true self. "No man 
can be made happy by wealth.” “ The hereafter never 
rises before the eyes of the careless youth, befooled by the 
delusion of wealth. ‘ This is the world,’ he thinks ; * there 
is no other.’ Thus he falls again and again into the 
power of death.” 4 " Wise men, knowing the nature of what 

is immortal, do not look for anything stable here among 
things unstable.” 5 Man is in anguish when he is separated 
from God, and nothing else than union with God can satisfy 
his heart’s hunger. 6 The unbounded aspirations of the 
soul for the ideally beautiful, the specklessly pure, are not 
answered by the objects limited in space, time and the 
shackles of sense. Many men there are who wish to realise 
the ideal of an absolutely worthy existence in love of another 
being. So long as that being is another human self, localised 
in space and time, the ideal is never attained. It is self- 
deception to seek the fullness of love and beauty in another 

' Chan., vii. i. 24. * Aitareya Aranyaka, ii. 3. 3. 1. 

3 Katha, ii. 2—3. « Katha, i. z. 6. 3 Katha, ii. 4. 2. 

6 " Miserable comforters are ye all, O that I knew where I might find 
Him ” (Job). 



214 INDIAN PHILOSOPHY 

human being, man or woman. The perfect realisation 
can only be in the Eternal. Detachment from the world 
and its possessions is necessary for this. From the beginning 
there were people who sought deliverance from sorrow in 
retirement from the world. Many there were who left 
wife and child, goods and chattels, and went out as mendi- 
cants, seeking the salvation of the souls in poverty and 
purity of life. These groups of ascetics, who burst the 
bonds that bound them to a home life, prepared the way 
for the monasticism of the Buddhists. A life of holy re- 
nunciation has been recognised to be the chief path to 
deliverance. 

It follows that the Upanisads insist on the inwardness 
of morality and attach great importance to the motive in 
conduct. Inner purity is more important than outer con- 
formity. Not only do the Upanisads say “ do not steal,” 
" do not murder,” but they also declare “ do not covet,” 
or ‘‘do not hate or yield to anger, malice and greed.” The 
mind will have to be purified, for it is no use cutting the 
branches if one leaves the roots intact. Conduct is judged 
by its subjective worth or the degree of sacrifice involved. 

The Upanisads require us to look upon the whole world 
as born of God as the self of man is. If insistence on this 
doctrine is interpreted as reducing all love finally to a well- 
directed egoism, the Upanisads admit that morality and 
love are forms of the highest self-realisation, but only object 
to the word "egoism” with all its associations. Yajna- 
valkya maintains that self-love lies at the foundation of 
all other kinds of love. Love of wealth and property, clan 
and country are special forms of self-love. The love of 
the finite has only instrumental value, while love of the 
eternal has intrinsic worth. " The son is dear for the sake 
of the eternal in him.” Finite objects help us to realise 
the self. Only the love of the Eternal is supreme love, 
which is its own reward, for God is love . 1 To love God 
is bliss ; not to love Him is misery. To love God is to 
possess knowledge and immortality ; not to love Him is 
to be lost in doubt and delusion, sorrow and death . 2 In 
all true religion it is the same dominating motive that 

I Kamayatana. Brh., iii. 9. 11. » Brh., iv. 4. 5. 



PHILOSOPHY OF THE UPANISADS 215 


we have. “ He that sinneth against me wrongeth his own 
soul. All they that hate me love death.” 1 The sinners 
are the slayers of their souls, according to the Upanisads 
“atmahano janah.” 

The Upanisads ask us to renounce selfish endeavours, 
but not all interests. Detachment from self and attachment 
to God are what the Upanisads demand. The ideal sage 
has desires, though they are not selfish desires. “ He who 
has no desires, who is beyond desires, whose desires are 
satisfied, whose desire is the soul, being even Brahman 
obtains Brahman.” 1 Kama, which we are asked to re- 
nounce, is not desire as such, but only the animal desire, 
lust, the impulsive craving of the brute man. Freedom 
from kama is enjoined, but this is not blank passivity. We 
are asked to free ourselves from the tyranny of lust and 
greed, from the fascination of outward things, from the 
fulfilment of instinctive cravings.3 Desire as such is not 
forbidden. It all depends upon the object. If a man’s 
desire is the flesh, he becomes an adulterer ; if things of 
beauty, an artist ; if God, a saint. The desires for salvation 
and knowledge are highly commended. A distinction is 
drawn between true desires and false ones,4 and we are 
asked to share in the true ones. The filial piety and affection 
of a Naciketas, the intense love and devotion of a Savitri 
are not faults. The Lord of all creation has kama in the 
sense of desire. “ He desired (akamayata), let me become 
many.” If the Lord has desires, why should not we ? We 
do not find in the Upanisads any sweeping condemnation 
of affections. We are asked to root out pride, resentment, 
lust, etc., and not the tender feelings of love, compassion 
and sympathy. It is true that here and there the Upanisads 
speak of tapas as a means of spiritual realisation. But 
tapas only means the development of soul force, the freeing 
of the soul from slavery to body, severe thinking or energising 
of mind, “ whose tapas consists of thought itself.” 5 Life is 
a great festival to which we are invited, that we might show 

1 Prov., viii. 36. See l£a. Up. * Brh., iv. 4. 6. 

3 The true saint is described as Santa, £ranta, danta, uparata, sanvahit*- 
These all imply the conquest of passion. 

< Chandogya, vii. x. 3. J Mupcjaka, i. 1. 9. 



216 


INDIAN PHILOSOPHY 


tapas or self-renunciation, dana or liberality, arjavam or 
right dealing, ahimsa or non-injury to life, and satyava- 
canam or truthfulness. 1 * * 4 It is the spirit of disinterested- 
ness that is conveyed by tapas or tyaga. “ Not by karma, 
not by offspring, not by wealth, but by renunciation can 
immortality be gained.” 1 The Chandogya Upanisad says 
“ sraddha tapah.” 3 Faith is asceticism. To realise freedom 
from the bondage of outward things one need not go to 
the solitude of the forest and increase his privations and 
penances that so the last remnants of earthly dependence 
might be thrown away. “ By renunciation thou shouldst 
enjoy,” says the Isa Upanisad. We can enjoy the world 
if we are not burdened by the bane of worldly possessions ; 
we are princes in the world if we do not harbour any thought 
of covetousness. Our enjoyment of the world is in direct 
proportion to our poverty. A call to renunciation in the 
sense of killing out the sense of separateness and developing 
disinterested love is the essence of all true religion.-! 

There was a change in Indian thought after the Vedic 
period. 5 Due to the asceticism of the Atharva-Veda, the 
mystic tendency increased. During the period of the hymns 
of the Rg-Veda there was a sort of selfish abandonment 
to pleasure. The spiritual instinct of the human soul 
asserted itself, and in the period of the Upanisads the 
protest against the tyranny of the senses was heard in 
clear tones. No more is the spirit to follow helpless and 
miserable the flesh that rages and riots. But this spirit 
of renunciation did not degenerate in the Upanisads into 
the insane asceticism of a later day, which revelled in the 
burning of bodies and such other practices. In the manner 
of Buddha, Bharadvaja protests against both worldly life 
and asceticism. 6 We may even say that this measureless 
and fanatical asceticism is not indicative of a true renuncia- 
tion, but is only another form of selfishness. Attempts to 


1 Chan., iii. 16 ; Tait., i. 9. 

• Narayanlya, iv. 21. 3 v. 10. 

4 “ Thou fool, that which thou sowest is not quickened except it die ” 
(1 Cnr. xv. 36). 

s See Rhys Davids: Buddhism, Hibbert Lectures, pp. 21-22. 

4 See Munijaka Up. 



PHILOSOPHY OF THE UPANISADS 217 


gain solitary salvation embodying the view that one’s soul 
is more precious than all the world’s souls put together 
are not the expression of any genuine modesty of spirit. 
The Upanisads require us to work but disinterestedly. 
The righteous man is not he who leaves the world and 
retires to a cloister, but he who lives in the world and loves 
the objects of the world, not for their own sake, but for 
the sake of the infinite they contain, the universal they 
conceal. To him God has unconditional value, and all 
objects possess derived values as vehicles of the whole 
or as the ways to God. Every common duty fulfilled, every 
individual sacrifice made, helps the realisation of the self. 
We may be fathers, for that is a way of transcending our 
narrow individuality and identifying ourselves with the 
larger purposes. Human love is a shadow of the divine 
love. We may love our wives for the sake of the joy that 
burns at the heart of things. “ In truth, not for the hus- 
band’s sake is the husband dear, but for the sake of the 
Atman is the husband dear,” says the Upanisad. The 
same is asserted with constant repetition of wife, sons, 
kingdoms, the Brahmin and the warrior castes, world 
regions, gods, living creations and the universe. They are 
all here, not on their own account, but for the sake of the 
Eternal . 1 The objects of the world are represented not as 
lures to sin, but as pathways to the divine bliss. When 
once we have the right vision, we may have wealth, etc . 2 
" Tato me iriyam avaha.” “ After that bring me wealth.” 
And Samkara points out that wealth is an evil to the unre- 
generate, but not to the man of wisdom. Things of the 
world seemingly undivine are a perpetual challenge to the 
spiritual soul. He has to combat their independence and 
turn them into expressions of the divine. He does all 
work in this spirit of detachment. "To be detached is 
to be loosened from every tie which binds a soul to the 
earth, to be dependent on nothing sublunary, to lean on 
nothing temporal. It is to care nothing what other men 
choose to say or think of us or do ; to go about our work 
as soldiers go to battle, without a care for the consequences, 
to account credit, honour, name, easy circumstances, com- 
■ Bfh., ii. 4 . 5. * Xiit., i. *. 



218 INDIAN PHILOSOPHY 

fort, human affection, just nothing at all when any religious 
obligation requires sacrifice of them.” 1 The Upanisads 
demand a sort of physical preparation for the spiritual 
fight. Cleansing, fasting, continence, solitude, etc., as 
purificatory of the body, are enjoined. “ May my body 
become fit, may my tongue become extremely sweet, may 
I hear much in my ears.” 1 This is not to despise the body 
as a clog and an encumbrance to the human soul. Nor 
has this purifying of the body, freeing of the senses, develop- 
ment of the mind, anything in common with self-torture.3 
Again, in the Chandogya Upanisadt we are told that the world 
of Brahman belongs to those who find it by brahmacarya. 
Brahmacarya is the discipline a student has to undergo 
when studying under a guru. It is not an ascetic with- 
drawal from the world, for the same Upanisad in viii. 5 
makes brahmacarya equivalent to the performing of sacrifices. 
It looks as if these were meant as a warning against the 
false interpretation of brahmacarya as aloofness from the 
world. The body is the servant of the soul and not its 
prison. There is no indication in the Upanisads that we 
must give up life, mind, consciousness, intelligence, etc. On 
the other hand, the doctrine of divine immanence leads to 
an opposite conclusion. 

“ The Indian sages, as the Upanisads speak of them,” 
according to Gough, “ seek for participation in divine life, 
not by pure feeling, high thought, and strenuous endeavour, 
not by unceasing effort to learn the true and do the right, 
but by the crushing out of every feeling and every thought, 
by vacuity, apathy, inertion and ecstasy.” 5 The aim of 
the Upanisads, according to Eucken, is “ not so much a 
penetration and overcoming of the world as a separation 
and liberation from it ; not an enhancement of life in order 
to maintain it even in face of the hardest resistance, but 
an abatement, a softening of all hardness, a dissolution, 
a fading away, a profound contemplation .” 6 The view 

1 Newman : University Sketches, p. 127. 1 Tait., i. 4. 

J Gough makes a mistake by translating tapas into self-torture. In 
Tait. i. 4 the injunctions are to the effect that the body must be rendered 
fit for the habitation of God. 

« viii. 4. 3. 5 Philosophy of the Upanisads, pp. 266-267. 

* Main Currents, p. 13. 



PHILOSOPHY OF THE UPANISADS 219 


here stated that the Upanisads demand a release from 
the conditions which constitute human life is a complete 
misconception. The Upanisads do not ask us to renounce 
life, do not taboo desires as such. The essence of ethical 
life is not the sublation of the will. The false asceticism 
which regards life as a dream and the world as an illusion, 
which has obsessed some thinkers in India as well as in 
Europe, is foreign to the prevailing tone of the Upanisads. 
A healthy joy in the life of the world pervades the atmo- 
sphere. To retire from the world is to despair of humanity 
and confess the discomfiture of God. “ Only performing 
works one should desire to live a hundred years.” 1 There 
is no call to forsake the world, but only to give up the dream 
of its separate reality. We are asked to pierce behind the 
veil, realise the presence of God in the world of nature and 
society. We are to renounce the world in its immediacy, 
break with its outward appearance, but redeem it for God 
and make it express the divinity within us and within it. 
The Upanisad conception of the world is a direct challenge 
to the spiritual activity of man. A philosophy of resignation, 
an ascetic code of ethics, and a temper of languid world- 
weariness are an insult to the Creator of the universe, a sin 
against ourselves and the world which has a claim on us. 
The Upanisads believe in God, and so believe in the world 
as well. 

The Upanisads do not content themselves with merely 
emphasising the spirit of true religion. They also give us 
a code of duties, without which the moral ideal will be an 
uncertain guide. All forms of conduct where passion is 
controlled and reason reigns supreme, where there is self- 
transcendence in the sense of freedom from the narrowness 
of selfish individuality, where we work because we are all 
co-operators in the divine scheme, are virtuous, and their 
opposites vicious. Restraint, liberality and mercy are 
virtues. 3 The principle that the left hand should not know 
what the right hand does is expressed in the following 
words : “ Give with faith, give not without faith give in 
plenty, give with bashfulness, give with fear, give with 
sympathy.” 3 In Chandogya (iii. 17) meditation, charity 
* Isa Upanisad, ii. • Bfh., v. 2. I Tait., i. n. 

8 


VOL. I 



220 


INDIAN PHILOSOPHY 


right dealing, non-injury to life and truthfulness are laid 
down as right forms of conduct. 1 To shrink from torturing 
the brute creation, to be sorry for a hunted hare, may be, 
according to our modern notions, silly sentimentalism fit 
only for squeamish women. But in the Upanisads love 
of brute creation is considered to be a great virtue. Kind- 
ness and compassion for all that has life on earth is a general 
feature of Indian ethics. It is a crime to kill a deer for 
sport or worry a rat for amusement. To attain conquest 
over passions, a discipline is sometimes enjoined. The 
Indian thinkers believe in the dependence of mind on body, 
and so prescribe purity of food as necessary for the purity 
of mind. 1 Control over the passions must be spontaneous, 
and when that is not possible forcible restraint is sometimes 
adopted. A distinction is made between tapas, or forcible 
constraint of passions, and nyasa, or spiritual renunciation. 
Tapas is for the vanaprastha who is in the lower stage, 
while nyasa is for the sannyasin. The yogic practices of 
concentration, contemplation, etc., are to be met with. 
“ The wise should sink speech in the mind and the mind 
into buddhi.” 3 Meditation and concentration as means 
of cleansing the mind are also enjoined. The individual 
is asked to turn all his thoughts inward and think only 
of God, not with an eye to obtaining favours, but to becoming 
one with Him. But even this exaltation of contemplative 
life is not necessarily an escape from reality. It is only 
the means by which we can see the ultimate truth of things. 
" With sharp and subtle mind is He beheld." 4 The four 
asramas of the brahmacarin or student, grhastha or house- 
holder, vanaprastha or anchorite, and sannyasi or wandering 
mendicant, are mentioned as representing the different steps 
by which man gradually purifies himself from all earthly 
taint and becomes fit for his spiritual home. 

Retirement from the world is enjoined for every Aryan 
when once his duties to society are fulfilled. It comes at 
the end of a man’s career. The ascetic wanderer, whose life 
is love and conduct righteousness, turns his eyes towards 
heaven and keeps himself free from the temptations of the 

1 See also i. 9. 12. * Aharasuddhau sat vas uddhi tu 

1 Katha, i. j. 10. 1 Ibid., iii. 1*. 



PHILOSOPHY OF THE UPANISADS 221 


world. The simple but devout minds of India were haunted 
by dreams of imperishable beauty and echoes of unceasing 
music. They live so intimately with the ideal that they 
are persuaded of its reality. To us it may be a dream, 
yet it is a dream in which they live, and it is therefore more 
real than the reality they ignore. A severe training of 
body and soul is prescribed for the ascetic, who alone can 
live such an ideal life. His life must be governed by the 
strictest purity and poverty. He is required to wear the 
yellow garments, shave his head and beg for his food in 
the streets. These are the means to help the soul to humility. 
The soul can mount to everlasting bliss by means of care- 
fully regulated prayers and fastings. What makes an 
ascetic great is his holiness and humility. It is not the 
capacity to do clever conjurer's tricks or dream hysteric 
dreams, but it is to remain pure from lust and resentment, 
passion and desire. This living martyrdom is ever so much 
more difficult than killing oneself. Death is easy. It is 
life that is taxing. A true ascetic is not one who gives 
up home and society to escape the social bonds ; he is not 
one who becomes a sannyasin because he suffers shipwreck 
in life. It is these latter that draw disgrace on the whole 
institution. The true sannyasin is he who, with self-control 
and spiritual vision, suffers for mankind. The labour of 
life is laid upon us to purify us from egoism, and social 
institutions are devices to help the growth of the soul. So 
after the grhasthasrama, or the stage of the householder, 
comes that of the recluse. The Upanisads declare that 
the knowers of Atman relinquish all selfish interests and 
become mendicants. “ Knowing Him, the Atman, Brahmins 
relinquish the desire for posterity, the desire for possessions, 
the desire for worldly prosperity, and go forth as mendicants .” 1 
In Ancient India, though the sannyasin is poor and penni- 


1 According to Oldenberg, this is the earliest trace of Indian monas- 
ticism. " From these Brahmins, who knowing the Atman renounce all that 
is earthly, and become beggars, the historical development progresses in 
a regular line up to Buddha, who leaves kith and kin, and goods and chattels, 
to seek deliverance, wandering homeless in the yellow garb of monk. • The 
appearance of the doctrine of the Eternal One and the origin of monastic 
life in India are simultaneous ; they are the two issues of the same important 
occurrence ” (Oldenberg : Buddha, p. 32). 



222 INDIAN PHILOSOPHY 

less, lives on daily charity, and has no power or authority 
of any kind, he is still held in such high esteem that the 
emperors of the world bow to him. Such is the reverence 
for holy life. 

The asramadharma, one of the central features of the 
Hindu religion, attempts to fill the whole of life with the 
power of spirit. It insists that a life of rigorous chastity is 
the proper preparation for married life. To the thinkers of 
the Upanisads, marriage is a religious sacrament, a form 
of divine service . 1 The home is sacred, and no religious 
ceremony is complete without the wife taking part in it. 
After the individual realises to the full the warmth and 
glow of human love and family affection, through marriage 
and parenthood, he is called upon to free himself slowly 
from attachment to home and family in order that he might 
realise his dignity as a citizen of the universe. If Buddhism 
failed to secure a permanent hold on the mind of India, 
it was because it exalted the ideal of celibacy over that 
of marriage and allowed all to enter the highest order of 
sannyasins, regardless of their previous preparation for it. 
The sannyasins are a spiritual brotherhood without possessions, 
without caste and nationality, enjoined to preach in the 
spirit of joy the gospel of love and service. They are the 
ambassadors of God on earth, witnessing to the beauty 
of holiness, the power of humility, the joy of poverty and 
the freedom of service. 

The rules of caste prescribe the duties to society. Man 
has to fulfil his duties whatever his lot may be. The 
functions depend on the capacities. Brahminhood does not 
depend on birth, but on character. The following story 
reveals this truth : 

Satyakama, the son of Jabala, addressed his mother and said: 
“ I wish to become a brahma :ann, mother. Of what family am I ? ” 

She said to him : “ I do not know, my child, of what family thou 
art. In my youth, when I had to move about much as a servant, 
I conceived thee. So I do not know of what family thou art. I 
am Jabala. by name. Thou art Satyakama. Say that thou art 
Satyakama Jabala.” 

He going to Gautama, the son of Haridrumat, said to him : " I 
wish to become a brahniacarin with thee. Sire. May 1 come to you ? ' 


1 See Tait. Up., i. 



PHILOSOPHY OF THE UPANISADS 223 

He said to him : “ Of what family art thou, my friend ? " 

He replied : “ I do not know. Sire, of what family I am. I asked 
my mother, and she answered : ' In my youth, when I had to move 
about much as a servant, I conceived thee. I do not know of what 
family thou art. I am Jabala by name, thou art Satyakama.’ I am 
therefore Satyakama Jabala, Sire.” 

He said to him : ” No one but a true Brahmin would thus speak 
out. Go and fetch fuel, I shall initiate thee. Thou hast not swerved 
from the truth.” 1 

The whole philosophy of the Upanisads tends towards 
the softening of the divisions and the undermining of class 
hatreds and antipathies. God is the inner soul of all alike. 
So all must be capable of responding to the truth and 
therefore possess a right to be taught the truth. Sanat- 
kumara, the representative of the Ksatriyas, instructs the 
Brahmin Narada about the ultimate mystery of things. 
Higher philosophy and religion were by no means confined 
to the Brahmin class. We read of kings instructing the 
famous teachers of the time about the deep problems of 
spirit. Janaka and Ajatasatru are Ksatriya kings who 
held religious congresses where philosophical disputations 
were conducted. It was a period of keen intellectual life. 
Even ordinary people were interested in the problems of 
philosophy. Wise men are found wandering up and down 
the country eager to debate. The Brahmin editors of the 
Upanisads had so sincere a regard for truth that they 
were ready to admit that Ksatriyas took an important 
part in these investigations . 1 Women, though they were 
much sheltered so far as the struggle for life was concerned, 
had equal rights with men in the spiritual struggle for 
salvation. Maitreyi, GargI discuss the deep problems of 
spirit and enter into philosophic tournaments.3 

It is true that the Upanisads lay stress on knowledge 
as the means to salvation. " Tarati Sokam atmavit,” the 
knower of Atman, crosses all sorrow. “ Brahmavid Brah- 
maiva bhavati,” the knower of Brahman, becomes indeed 
Brahman. Because the Upanisads lay stress on jnana, 
and look upon all morality as a preliminary to it, there are 

1 Chandogya, iv. 4. 1. 4. 

1 See Kausltaki Up., i. 4. 2 ; Brh., iii. 7 ; Chan. v. 3. 7. 

1 Brh., ii. 4 . 



224 INDIAN PHILOSOPHY 

critics who contend that the Upanisads in their enthusiasm 
for jnana relegate the will to a subordinate place. Deussen, 
after urging that morality has no meaning for the enlight- 
ened, says that it is not necessary even for the unenlightened. 
“ Moral conduct cannot contribute directly but only in- 
directly to the attainment of the knowledge that brings 
emancipation. For this knowledge is not a becoming 
something which had no previous existence and might be 
brought about by appropriate moans, but it is the per- 
ception of that which previously existed from all eternity.” 1 
But the Upanisads do not advocate knowledge in the 
narrow sense of the term as the sole means to salvation. 
“ That self cannot be gained by the knowledge of the Veda 
or by understanding or by much learning.” 3 Right living 
is also insisted on. Knowledge should be accompanied by 
virtue. If the candidate for theology does not possess 
moral and spiritual attainments, he is not admitted, what- 
ever be his zeal and inquisitiveness.3 Jnana, we must 
make it clear, is not mere intellectual ability. It is the 
soul-sense. The mind of the applicant must not be too 
restless or too much taken up with the world to fix itself 
on the Highest. His heart must be purified and warmed 
by devotion to God. We hear in the Upanisads of people 
who are required to go through a long course of moral and 
spiritual discipline before they are taken up as students 
by those rsis, the specialists in the science of God. In 
the Prasna Upanisad, Pippalada sends away six inquirers 
after God for another year of discipline. In the Chandogya 
Upanisad, Satyakama Jabala is sent to the wilds of the 
forests to tend the teacher’s cattle, that thereby he might 
cultivate habits of solitary reflection and come into contact 
with nature. The jnana which the Upanisads emphasise 
is the faith which becomes the living law of the soul’s energy. 
As the tree bears fruit, knowledge must realise itself in work. 
When we have jnana we are said to possess truth, make it 
our own and be transformed by it. This is not possible 
for " one who has not ceased from wicked conduct, who 

1 Philosophy of the Upanisads, p. 362. 

* Mup<laka, iii. 2. 3. See also iii. 1. 8. 

1 See Kapia, i. 2. 24-25. 



PHILOSOPHY OF THE UPANISADS 225 

is not calm, who is not collected and in whose heart there 
is not peace.” Ramanuja therefore interprets knowledge to 
be dhyana, meditation, or upasana, worship. ' There does 
not seem to be any justification for the interpretation that 
excludes moral life from knowledge. It is true that the 
Upanisads urge that mere works will not do, unless these 
express the feeling of unity with the self. “ Nay, even if 
one who does not know that self should perform here some 
great holy work, it will perish for him in the end. If the 
man worships the self only as his true spirit, his work does 
not perish. For whatever he desires, that he obtains from 
this self.” 1 This passage insists that works must be per- 
formed with knowledge. Without faith in the transcendent 
mere works languish . 1 The real end of man cannot be 
reached by mere mechanical goodness. In all works, in 
offering sacrifices, in observing ritual, there is self-trans- 
cendence, but not necessarily identification with the infinite. 
All works must be done with the definite motive of promoting 
the interest of the real self. Without God our life has no 
aim, no existence and no support. The Upanisads con- 
demn the rites and sacrifices performed with the sole idea 
of bringing about large returns of outward good either in 
this world or in the next. We should not do our duty 
with the motive of purchasing shares in the other world 
or opening a bank account with God. In protesting against 
such a mechanical conception of duty in the Brahmanas, 
the Upanisads lay stress on a necessary truth. But they 
lend no support to the view that works and knowledge 
are exclusive of each other, and that knowledge alone leads 
to salvation. The Upanisads insist on a life of spirit 
which combines both jnana and karma. 

Just as the ideal of the intellect cannot be realised so 
long as we remain at the intellectual level, but can be found 
when we transcend that level, and rise to intuition, even 
so the ideal of morality cannot be reached so long as we 
remain at the moral level, but can be reached when we rise 
to religion. At the moral level the two sides of our nature, 
the finite and the infinite, are in conflict. The finite breathes 
egoism or ahamkara, and gives the individual a sense of 
* Brh., i. 4.15. • See Brh., iii. 8. 10. 



226 INDIAN PHILOSOPHY 

his separateness from the universal. The infinite in him 
rushes forth to realise itself in the world. The self-fulfilment 
of spirit is opposed by the tendency to the disintegration 
of spirit. We attempt to hold the lower nature in check 
through the practice of morality, but until the lower is 
completely spiritualised the ideal is not attained. It is 
when we destroy the exclusiveness of our individuality 
and therewith the sense of separateness that we enter the 
joy of religion and realise the full freedom of the spirit. 

The possibility of this religious realisation is the pre- 
supposition of all morality. Without it we cannot be sure 
that the aspirations of morality will be realised. In the 
face of disasters and dreads, death and disease, the con- 
viction that in spite of the apparent discord and contra- 
diction all things work together for good, cheers us. Morality 
requires the postulate of religion. God gives us the security 
that all is well with the world and man is bound to 
win. “ When a man finds his peace and resting-place in 
that invisible, intangible, inexpressible, unfathomable, 
then has he attained to peace. If, however, a man admits 
therein an interval, a separation, then his unrest continues ; 
it is, moreover, the unrest of one who imagines himself 
wise .” 1 With this religious guarantee the pressure of cir- 
cumstance or the persecution of man fails to disquiet us. 
No rivalry provokes us to anger or bitterness. Religion 
is the inspiration of morality. Without religion morality 
becomes an eternal striving, a perpetual progress, an endless 
aspiration towards something we do not have. In religion 
all this is turned into realisation, enjoyment and fruition. 
Then is the weakness of finite endowment overcome, and the 
finite self becomes endowed with a meaning and a mission. 
When once this consciousness is reached the continuance 
or the cessation of bodily existence becomes a matter of 
indifference . 2 Man is consumed with the fire of the love 
of God and the service of humanity. He does not care 

> Brh., iv. 2. 4. 

» “ I have seen the wicked in great power, and spreading himself like 
a green bay tree. Yet he passed away, and lo, he was not : yea, I sought 
him, but he could not be found. Mark the perfect man, and behold the 
upright : for the end of that man is peace ’’ (Psa. xxxvii. 35-37). 



PHILOSOPHY OF THE UPANISADS 227 


whether the path he has to traverse is smooth or rough. 
When a man realises the truth, evil turns away from him 
and is itself destroyed, just as a ball of earth hitting against 
a solid stone. 1 

As the intuitional level goes beyond the categories of 
intellect, even so does the religious level pass beyond the 
distinctions of good and evil. He who reaches the highest 
is above all laws.* “ Him does not afflict the thought, 
why have I not done what is good, why have I committed 
sin ? ” 3 He fears nothing and does not trouble himself 
about his deeds and misdeeds in the past. “ He the im- 
mortal is beyond both, beyond good and evil ; what is 
done and what is left undone cause him no pain, his domain 
is affected by no action.” This admits the possibility of 
blotting out the effects of a sinful life by a sincere change 
of heart. On this principle is based the Christian doctrine 
that no amount of sin is a bar to salvation, provided an 
act of sure repentance has been performed. When once 
the soul attains the real, “ in whom to dwell is happiness 
imperishable,” the human body is suffused with the splen- 
dour of divinity in which all that is mean and vile shrivels 
and dies. The question of morality has no significance. 
For it is no more the individual that does anything. His 
will is God’s will and his life God’s life. He has joined the 
whole, and thus become the whole. All action flows from 
the spring in God. There is no more the distinction between 
God and the individual. Dr. Bosanquet, in his excellent 
little book on What Religion Is, brings out this fundamental 
oneness of the highest condition. “ In the purity of love 
and will with the supreme good, you are not only ‘ saved,’ 
but you are ‘ free ’ and ‘ strong.’ . . . You will not be 
helped by trying to divide up the unity and tell how much 
comes from ‘ you ’ and how much from ‘ God.’ You have 
got to deepen yourself in it, or let it deepen itself in you, 
whatever phrase expresses the fact best to your mind.” 4 

* Chandogya, i. 2. 7. 1 Kausltaki, ii. 8 ; Brh., iv. 4. 22. 

> Tait., ii. 9. 

4 Pp. 20-21. " As a drop of water is diffused in a jar of wine, taking 

its taste and colour, and as molten iron becomes like to fire and casts off 
its form, and as the air transfused with sunlight is transformed into that 

8 * 


VOL. I 



228 INDIAN PHILOSOPHY 

Unfortunately, this central truth of religious life is not 
sufficiently understood by even some good students of 
Indian thought. The latest critic of the Upanisads, Dr. 
Hume, observes : " There is a wide difference between the 
Upani?adic theory and the theory of the Greek sages, 
that the man who has knowledge should thereby become 
virtuous in character, or that the result of teaching should 
be a virtuous life. Here the possession of some metaphysical 
knowledge actually cancels all past sins and even permits 
the knower unblushingly to continue in ‘ what seems to 
be much evil ’ with perfect impunity, although such acts 
are heinous crimes and are disastrous in their effect for 
others who lack that kind of knowledge.” 1 We have 
already said that the knowledge of the Upanisads is not 
metaphysical acumen or dialectical subtlety, but the reali- 
sation of the highest as the supreme power at the heart 
of the universe. This spiritual perception is possible only 
with a thorough transformation of human nature in its 
theoretical and practical aspects. What Dr. Hume calls 
" the possession of some metaphysical knowledge ” is pos- 
sible only for the pure in heart. They have perfect freedom. 
" In that highest state a thief is not a thief, a murderer 
not a murderer. He is not followed by good, nor followed 
by evil, for he then overcomes all the sorrows of the heart.” ’ 
The free can do what they choose with perfect impunity, 
but this freedom is not ‘‘the madness of license.” 3 The 
mystic becomes a law unto himself and the lord of 
himself and of the world in which he lives. Laws and 
regulations are necessary for those men who do not naturally 
conform to the dictates of conscience. But for those who 
have risen above their selfish egos, morality becomes the 
very condition of their being, and law is fulfilled in love. 
There is no possibility of evil-doing in them. Pressure 

same light, so that it seems not illumined but itself the light, thus in the 
saints every human affection must in ineffable mode be liquefied of itself 
and transfused into the Will of God. How could God be all, if in man any- 
thing of man remained ? A certain substance will remain, but in another 
form, another glory, another power ” (St. Bernard, quoted in Mind, 1913, 
P- 329)- 

1 Introduction to The Thirteen Principal Upanisads, p. 60. 

* Bjb., iv. s Rabindranath Tagore: Sadhana, p. 18. 



PHILOSOPHY OF THE UPANISADS 229 

fro without is converted into an inward acceptance. Till 
the spiritual life is won, the law of morality appears to 
be an external command which man has to obey with effort 
and pain. But when the light is obtained it becomes the 
internal life of the spirit, working itself out unconsciously 
and spontaneously. The saint’s action is an absolute sur- 
render to the spontaneity of spirit, and is not an unwilling 
obedience to externally imposed laws. We have the free 
outpouring of an unselfish spirit which does not calculate 
the rewards of action or the penalties of omission. The 
conventional standards, the external duties and the ethical 
rules become meaningless to him. The soul delights in 
that supreme blessedness, perceives the unity of all, and 
loves the world as we love our separate selves. “ A per- 
fectly good will would therefore be equally subject to objective 
laws (viz. laws of good), but could not be conceived as 
obliged thereby to act lawfully, because of itself from its 
subjective constitution it can only be determined by the 
conception of good. Therefore no imperatives hold for the 
Divine will or in general for a holy will ; ought is here out 
of place, because volition is already of itself necessarily 
in unison with the law.” 1 The moral laws are its expression, 
and therefore do not bind it. Such a supreme soul is the 
creator of values and svarat, 1 a law to himself. In the 
scheme of the world we have three classes of beings : 
(x) Those who strive after self-assertion and gratification of 
appetites, the bad men who, if ever they practise virtue, 
do so for selfish reasons, such as hope of heaven or fear of 
hell ; (2) men who know the law and try to conform to 
it with great effort and trouble, since their selves are subject 
to discord ; and (3) the saviours of the world, who have 
overcome the conflict of life and attained peace. They know 
the purpose of life and live up to it unconsciously and auto- 
matically. The Upanisad asks us in cases of doubt and 
difficulty to conduct ourselves in the manner in which the 
knowers of Brahman devoted to duty would do. 3 These 
great men go on doing their daily work, diffusing virtue 
as the star diffuses light and the flower perfume, without 

! Kant’s Metaphysics of Morals, p. 31 (Abbot's edition). 

1 Sva yam eva rajab. * Tait. i. 11. 



230 


INDIAN PHILOSOPHY 


even being aware of it. Every man can realise such a 
condition. The possibility of becoming one with God can 
be established only by the actuality of it. The fact of 
realisation is the only proof of the possibility of the identi- 
fication of man with the all-powerful spirit. According 
to Christian thinkers, one such complete manifestation of 
God in man is in the personality of Jesus. The Upanisads 
declare that all men have in them the possibility of rising 
to their full divine stature, and can realise it if they strive 
for it. 

Since morality has a meaning only in the imperfect 
world where man is struggling to realise his highest nature, 
it is sometimes said that in the metaphysical system of 
the Upanisads morality does not find a worthy place. 
Deussen observes that when “ the knowledge of the Atman 
has been gained, every action and therefore every moral 
action also has been deprived of meaning.” 1 All through 
we have been indicating the basis of such complaints. Moral 
activity is not an end in itself. It is to be taken over into 
the perfect life. Only this has transcendental worth. The 
liberated in the fine phrase of the Talmud share with the 
Almighty in the work of creation. Here we have morality 
as obedience to a law displaced by the true idea of free 
service of an end, spontaneous devotion to the whole. In 
this state the individual being is absorbed in the Supreme. 
This alone has transcendental worth, but the moral struggle 
as preparing the way for it is not useless. 

XVI 

The Religious Consciousness 

Religion is essentially a matter of life and experience. 
The Upanisads prescribe three stages in the growth of the 
religious consciousness, viz. sravana, which literally means 
listening, manana or reflection, and nididhyasana or con- 
templative meditation . 2 The first stage points to the place 

1 Philosophy of the Upanisads, p. 362, 

» Brh. Up., ii. 4, 5; iv. 5. 6. Udayana in his Kusutndnjali, I. 3. quotes <1 
verse which mentions agama or scripture, anumana or inference, and dhyana 
or meditation. 



PHILOSOPHY OF THE UPANISADS 231 


of tradition in religious life For the initiation of faith 
in the living God, some kind of traditional revelation is 
necessary. “ Blessed are they that have not seen and 
yet have believed.” The bulk of men rest with tradition 
and symbol. Religion, according to the Upanisads, is not, 
however, to be confused with traditionalism. By strenuous 
intellectual effort, we should try to understand the essential 
meaning of or the truth contained in the tradition. The 
need for rational thought is brought out in the second stage. 
The mere assumption of the first stage becomes now a logical 
conclusion. The understanding of truth, however, is not 
the attainment of reality. To the highest religious con- 
sciousness, the real is not something inferred, but given. 
This experience of reality, this consciousness of the infinite, 
requires the development of a mode of apprehension distinct 
from that of mere reason. Nididhyasana, or contemplative 
meditation, helps us to transform the logical idea into a 
spiritual perception, or dariana, which is another name 
for the effective realisation of truth already admitted. It 
is to stand alone, and like Whitman, after a logical study 
of astronomy, “ to gaze in perfect silence at the stars.” 
It is to hold before the mind’s eye the object we seek to 
know. Meditation is not advised as a means to trance and 
catalepsy, which are most emphatically denounced, but only 
as a help for the mind to rest on the object. By suppressing 
all fluctuations of thought and the distractions of desire, 
we allow the mind to settle on the object, penetrate it and 
become one with it. The worship of God, the practice of good- 
ness and the pursuit of truth are aids to the building up 
of the life of truth in the soul. While the speculative mind 
contemplates the being of God, the emotional nature in its 
passionate devotion for God loses itself in Him. The object 
is no more outside us as in ordinary experience. There is 
an intense realisation, which pulses through the whole 
being, a becoming one with God as it were. The worshipper 
grows akin to that which he worships. The object becomes 
not only the content of but the consciousness itself of the 
contemplator. The transformation of mind is in a sense 
the transformation of existence itself. The Upanisads 
speak to us of the intuition of minor deities as well as the 



232 INDIAN PHILOSOPHY 

ecstatic intuition of Brahman. So long as the objects 
intuited have limitations or traces of individuality, the ulti- 
mate goal is not reached. We must intuit Brahman to 
become Brahman. 

It is clear that the religion of the Upanisads insists on 
a transformation of the whole nature of man. It is not 
a mere formal cult or an ethical discipline or a dogmatic 
creed. It is untrue to say that the Upanisads do not care 
for the non-intellectual sides of human nature. They pro- 
vide room for an emotional as well as a speculative religion. 
The Upanisads are aware of the contradictions which 
ordinary religious consciousness is apt to exhibit. If 
God is perfect goodness, then morality is already 
realised, for everything that is must be the expression 
of a perfect will. If God is the Creator of the world, 
then He must bring something into existence which 
limits His nature. Either the world created is distinct 
from God the Creator, in which case He is limited by His 
creation, or the two are identical, a possibility which is 
repugnant to all religion and morality. In religion we 
have the will of man set over against the will of God. If 
the two are one, then there is no morality, for there is no 
independent reality of the human will. If the two are 
different, then God becomes limited and finite, and a finite 
God cannot inspire confidence in us. Again, if we attribute 
to God a free will, then He can overrule karma, and caprice 
will become the central fact ; if on the other hand He is 
subject to laws and treats us according to our karma, then 
His freedom is restricted. These contradictions may lead 
us to think that the highest conception of God we can 
possibly have is not the highest reality. Religion may 
lag behind and have to be content with a finite God, how- 
ever contradictory such a conception may be. This may 
be justified on the ground that it is not its main business 
to discover the highest truth, and that philosophically we 
may have to admit that all conceptions of God, however 
lofty they may be, are only relative . 1 While this may 
be the implication of the Upanisad theory, it becomes an 
explicit doctrine only when the intuitive vision of the 
* See Kena, i. 5. 8. 



PHILOSOPHY OF THE UPANISADS 233 

Upanisads is converted into a scientific system of thought. 
The Upanisads, indeed, recognise higher and lower forms 
of religion. 

We have to remember that the highest religion of the 
Upanisads, which insists on meditation and morality and 
worship of God in spirit and in truth, is not encumbered 
by such traditional dogmas and miracles as still hang upon 
the skirts of other religions. Its central principle that 
there is one supreme reality that manifests itself in the 
universe is not asserted as a dogma. It is the ultimate 
truth at which it is possible for human understanding to 
arrive. The progress of science and philosophy does not 
conflict with it but only confirms it. The Upanisad re- 
ligion is the feeling of reverence and love for the great spirit. 
Such meditation is spiritualised bhakti. It recognises also 
that the distinction between subject and object melts away 
in the heart of religious fervour. The oneness and whole- 
ness of the world is the supreme fact of the Upanisad religion. 
This may not satisfy the ordinary religious consciousness. 
Man as finite self is incapable of grasping the absolute 
reality. He makes an object of it set over against himself. 
The Absolute becomes a personal God. Though it is not 
the final truth, ordinary religious consciousness requires it. 
God is the friend and helper, the father and creator, the 
governor of the universe. He is said to be the supreme 
person (Purusottama), but He does not rule the world from 
without. In that case there would be no organic connection 
between Him and the world. He is the inner guide or the 
antaryami. Though a person, he is said to be above all, 
in all, and through all. All things are of Him, in Him 
and unto Him. But as Jacobi would put it, an understood 
God is no God at all. To imagine God is what we think 
is nothing less than blasphemy. Though the God of religion 
is a limited expression of the absolute, it is not a mere 
imaginative presentation. In the development of the abso- 
lute into the universe conceived by the finite mind, the 
first existent being is the God or the universal soul pos- 
sessing self-consciousness. He is the absolute personified. 
The Upanisads do not care to identify Him with the ideal 
tendency of things opposing and struggling through the 



234 


INDIAN PHILOSOPHY 


non-ideal ; in that case He would be reduced to the level 
of the finite. According to the Upanisads, the Absolute 
and God are one ; we call it the supreme Brahman to 
emphasise its transcendence of the finite, its unknowability, 
its all-comprehensiveness ; we call it Isvara to emphasise 
the personal aspect so necessary for religious devotion. 
The relation between the two, the absolute Brahman and 
the personal Isvara, may be like that of the true Lord to 
the idol. 1 Yet the two are one. The absolute is both per- 
sonal and impersonal. 3 Meditation on the supreme becomes 
the passionate devotion to the Lord of the universe. The 
individual looks upon God as something transcendent, and 
feels acutely the need of grace. Devaprasada, or grace of 
God, is the condition of the deliverance of man from bondage. 
“ This Atman cannot be attained through study or intelli- 
gence or much learning — whom he wishes to attain by him 
it can be attained. To him the Atman reveals its true 
nature.” 3 Sometimes the religious passion grows so fervent 
that the devotee exclaims : “ It is He who inspires to do good 
works the man whom He will lead on high, and it is He 
who inspires to do evil works the man whom He will 
lead downwards.” 4 The oneness of God and man is 
realised only after a good deal of discipline and exercise. 
When the ideal of religion is reached, the personal conception 
is transcended. The higher we go in religious experience, 
the more we perceive the identity between the object of 
worship and the worshipper, till at last the two become one. 
Then there is no worship in the traditional sense of the 
term. The absolute is felt as a boundless spirit pervading 
the whole universe and flooding the soul of man. Our 
limits fall away and the defects incident to man’s imperfec- 
tion dissolve. The end of religion is the transcendence 
of religion. Ideal religion overcomes the duality with 
which it starts. Religious worship starts with fear, passes 
through reverence, love and communion with the eternal, 
and culminates in the ecstatic life, where God and the soul 

* 6amkara’s Commentary on Tait., i. 6. “ Jsalagrama iva vijpo^.” 

1 Murtamurtam. Sariikara’s Commentary on Tait., i. 6. 

i Mundaka, iii. 2. 3 ; Katha, ii. 23. 

« Kausltaki, iii. 8. 



PHILOSOPHY OF THE UPANISADS 235 

melt into each other. Religious worship has to be accepted 
until the perfect condition is reached. 

Imperfect forms of worship are admitted as preparatory 
to the perfect. The Upanisads are led into inconsistent 
notions when they try to do too much justice to the con- 
flicting creeds which prevailed among the peoples of the 
time. Some believed in magic ; some tried to subdue the 
powers of nature by concentration and other ascetic prac- 
tices ; some were lost in a futile formalism ; some wor- 
shipped the Vedic gods ; some tried to effect an escape 
from this world of change by means of spiritual insight. 
The Upanisad thinkers, conscious of the weakness of 
human understanding which has to limit the God present 
in all things, at all times, and in all places to some special 
place, time and thing, recognise that if lower forms of 
worship are dismissed, there is the risk of banishing God 
altogether out of life. Some worship is better than none, 
and so it is said that we become whatever form we worship. 
“ Let him worship the Brahman as support, and he becomes 
supported. Let him worship Brahman as greatness, and 
he becomes great. Let him worship Brahman as mind, 
he becomes endowed with mind. And let him worship 
Brahman as Brahman, and he will become possessed of 
Brahman .” 1 God reveals Himself in different ways to 
different men. This is not to be confused with the doctrine 
of incarnations, which is unknown to the Upanisads. The 
Upanisads consider the highest form of religion to be 
spiritual meditation on the absolute ; next in rank is the 
passionate devotion to the one immanent Lord ; lowest of 
all is the worship of the Vedic devas and other deities. 

It is frequently urged that the Upanisads do not admit 
of any religious worship. Dr. Urquhart writes : “ However 
clearly the attitude of true worship may seem to be indicated, 
there is a constant refrain sometimes even in the same verse 
to the effect that the self who is to be worshipped is the 
self of the worshipper, and that consequently there is no 
such distinction between the two (God and man), as is 
demanded by the fully theistic relation.” 3 The Upanisads 

1 Tait., iii. 10 ; see also Chan., i. 3. 12 ; Brh., i. 2. 13. 

* The Upanisads and Life, p. 60. 



236 


INDIAN PHILOSOPHY 


are emphatic about the oneness of God and man. The 
relative difference we recognise between the two is taken 
over in a higher unity. “ If a man worships another 
divinity with the idea that he and the God are different, 
he does not know.” 1 The unity of spirit is the first prin- 
ciple of the Upanisad doctrine. Divine immanence is its 
central fact. If that is inconsistent with religious worship, 
it means only that theism has no place for true religion, 
since a true theism must accept divine immanence. All 
true religion declares that finite things are not self-sustained, 
are not self-evolved, but that God is over all, through all, 
in all, the ground of existence, the source of life and the 
goal of desire. " If I ascend up into heaven, thou art 
there : if I make my bed in hell, behold. Thou art there. 
If I take the wings of the morning, and dwell in the utter- 
most parts of the sea; even there shall Thy hand lead me.”* 
" Am I a God, at hand, saith the Lord and not a God afar 
off ? Can any hide himself in secret places that I shall 
not see him ? saith the Lord ; Do not I fill Heaven and 
earth ? ” “ In God, we live and move and have our being,” 3 

and “ He who dwelleth in love, dwelleth in God, and God 
in him.” * All true religion recognises the immanence of 
God and is highly mystic. 


XVII 

Moksa or Release 

Is the highest state of religious realisation, the atone- 
ment with the supreme godhead, a mere vanishing into 
nothingness ? The Upanisad view is that there is in the 
highest condition a disintegration of individuality, a giving 
up of selfish isolation, but it is not a mere nothing or death. 
“ As the flowing rivers disappear in the sea, losing their 
name and form, thus a wise man, freed from name and 
form, goes to the divine person who is beyond all.” 5 The 
Upanisads do not recognise the ultimate reality of the 

■ Brh„ i. 4. 10. 1 Psalm cxxxix. 

3 St. Paul. 4 St. John. 

< Munijaka, iii. 2. 8. See also Prasna, vi. 5. 



PHILOSOPHY OF THE UPANISADS 237 


narrow individual self. Those who pray for personal im- 
mortality take their stand on the ultimateness of the 
individual, and urge its maintenance beyond the world. 
The real in finite life, what is best in the individual’s nature, 
is the infinite, and that persists beyond the limits of physical 
existence. Nothing of value is lost. Whatever spiritual 
values we seek after on earth and find imperfectly, we 
possess in the highest condition absolutely. As human 
beings we reach our ideals imperfectly, in flashes and 
moments of insight. In the highest condition we attain 
to them perfectly, completely and absolutely. The Taitti- 
rfya Upanisad points out how the bliss we have in the 
world is only a shadow of the divine bliss, a feeble apology 
for it. 1 After all our troubles in the sea of life we do not 
reach a desert shore where we are obliged to die of hunger. 
The liberated condition must be looked upon as the fullest 
expression of the self. The ascent to God will be a lapse 
into the void or the abyss, if the ultimate Brahman is itself 
looked upon as an abstraction. Then the goal of man is 
annihilation. The Upanisads dispute such a conclusion. 
The highest is a state of rapture and ecstasy, a condition 
of ananda, where the creature as creature is abolished, but 
becomes one with the Creator, or more accurately realises 
his oneness with Him. We cannot describe this perfection 
adequately. We use symbols. The nature of eternal life 
is a condition of ananda or freedom, a state of joyous ex- 
pansion of the soul, where heaven and earth are felt to flow 
together. 

Its nature cannot be characterised except through image 
and metaphor. We have some states in this life which 
may be taken as illustrations of eternal or timeless existence. 
Baron Von Hiigel speaks to us of trance conditions which 
“ appear to the experiencing soul, in proportion to their 
concentration, as timeless, i.e. as non-successive, simul- 
taneous, hence as eternal. . . . The eternity of the soul is 
not here a conclusion drawn from the apparent God-likeness 
in other respects, of the soul when in this condition, 
but the eternity, on the contrary, is the very centre 
of the experience itself, and is the chief inducement 
• See ii. 8 ; Kausltaki, i. 3. 5 ; Brh., iv. 3. 33. 



238 INDIAN PHILOSOPHY 

to the soul for holding itself to be divine. The 
soul’s immortality cannot be experienced in advance of 
death, whilst its eternity, in the sense indicated, is or 
seems to be directly experienced in such " this-life ” states. 
Hence the belief in immortality is here derivative, that in 
eternity is primary .” 1 In the enjoyment of a melody, 
the contemplation of a work of art, in grasping an argument 
as a whole, we have the mystical condition, the sight of 
God, the experience of eternity.* The temporal happenings 
become eternal when viewed in relation to the absolute, 
and thus assigned their true worth. 

Since from our human point of view it is not possible 
to describe the fullness of the absolute reality, the Upanisads 
do not describe precisely the condition of ultimate freedom. 
There are two conflicting accounts running throughout : 
that it is a state of likeness to God, and that it is a state 
of oneness with God. 

There are passages where the individual is said to 
become one with the highest. “ The pranava is the bow, 
the Atman is the arrow, and the Brahman is said to be its 
mark. It should be hit by one who is self-collected, and 
that which hits becomes like the arrow, one with the 

■ Eternal Life, p. 27. 

1 St. Augustine in his Confessions, says : '* Suppose all the tumult ol 
the flesh in us were hushed for ever, and all sensible images of earth and 
sea and air were put to silence ; suppose the heavens were still and even 
the soul spoke no words to itself, but passed beyond all thought of itself ; 
suppose all dreams and revelations of imagination were hushed with every 
word and sign and everything that belongs to this transitory world ; suppose 
they were all silenced — though, if they speak to one who hears, what they 
say is, ‘ We made not ourselves, but He made us who abides for ever ’ — yet 
suppose they only uttered this and then were silent, when they had turned 
the ears of the hearer to Him who made them, leaving Him to speak alone, 
not through them but through Himself, so that we could hear His words, 
not through any tongue of flesh nor by the voice of an angel, nor in thunder, 
nor in any likeness that hides what it reveals ; suppose then that the God 
whom through such manifestations we have learnt to love were to be 
revealed to us directly without any such mediation — just as, but now, we 
reached out of ourselves and touched by a flash of insight the eternal wisdom 
that abides above all ; suppose, lastly, that this vision of God were to be 
prolonged for ever, and all other inferior modes of vision were to be taken 
away, so that this alone should ravish and absorb the beholder and entrance 
him in mystic joy, and our very life for ever like the moment of clear insight 
and inspiration to which we rose — is not this just what is meant by the words 
• Enter thou into the joy of thy Lord ’ ? " 



PHILOSOPHY OF THE UPANISADS 239 


'mark, that is Brahman.” 1 The Atman becomes one with 
Brahman. 3 Here absolute identity between the soul and 
Brahman is asserted. Again, “ All these become one in the 
highest imperishable Brahman.” 3 " He becomes merged 
in the supreme undecaying Atman.” 4 “ He becomes 

omniscient and becomes all.” 5 " He enters into all.” 6 The 

redeemed soul enters into all things and becomes all things 
in spirit. “ Having attained him, the seers content with 
their knowledge, their purpose accomplished, free from all 
desire, and with full composure, having attained the all- 
pervading Atman on all sides, ever concentrating their 
minds, enter into everything. ” 7 They who see the whole 
universe held firm in the one all-enfolding presence cannot 
have any sorrow or torment. " Having without doubt 
well ascertained the significance of the knowledge of the 
Vedanta, the seekers, their minds purified by dint of re- 
nunciation attain the worlds of that Brahman, and when 
their body falls, their Atman being one with the highest 
immortal Brahman, are absolved all round.” 8 The liberated 
soul feels his oneness with God so intensely that he calls 
himself the creator of the world. “ I am the food, I am 
the food-eater. I am the subject, I am the object, I am 
the two together. I am the firstborn, the destroyer of the 
world also. I am the sunlike light. I am the centre of 
the world, of immortal gods.” 9 These passages seem to 
imply that there is no sense of individuality, and therefore 
no possibility of action in the highest state. It seems to 
be a survival without consciousness, where body is dissolved 
and mind extinguished and all is lost in a boundless dark- 
ness. If we please, we may call it the sleep without dreams, 
or the peace without understanding. When Yajnavalkya 
explains it to Maitreyi in the words: “As a lump of salt 
which is thrown into the water dissolves and cannot be 
gathered up again, but wherever water is drawn, it is salty, 
so truly is it with this great being, the endless, the unlimited, 

1 Mundaka, ii. 2. 2. See also Katha, ii. 15. 

■ Ssaravat tanmayo bhavet. 

J Mundaka, iii. 2. 7. Sarva ekibhavanti. 4 Prasna, iv. 9. 

5 iv. 10. Sa sarvajnah sarvo bhavati. 

1 i. vii. Sarvam evavi^anti. 

J Mundaka, iii. 2. 5. ! iii. 2 . 6 . f Tait., iii. 



290 INDIAN PHILOSOPHY 

are indifferent, if not opposed, to the authority of the Vedas. 
From the striking similarities in the lives and teachings of 
Buddha and Vardhamana, it is sometimes argued that the 
two svstems of Buddhism and Jainism are one, and that 
Jainism is only an offshoot of Buddhism. Barth writes : 
“ The legend of Vardhamana, or to apply to him the name 
which is most in use, Mahavira, the great hero, the Jina 
of the present age presents so many and so peculiar points 
of contact with that of Gautama Buddha, that we are instinct- 
ively led to conclude that one and the same person is the 
subject of both. Both are of royal birth ; the same names 
recur among their relations and disciples. They were born 
and they died in the same country and at the same period 
of time. According to the accepted reports, the nirvana 
of the Jina took place in 526 B.c.,that of Buddha in 543 B.c. ; 
and if we make allowances for the uncertainty inherent in 
these data, the two dates may be considered to be identical. 
Coincidences quite similar occur in the course of the two 
traditions. Like the Buddhists, the Jainas claim to have 
been patronised by the Maurya princes. A district which 
is a holy land for the one is almost always a holy land for 
the other, and their sacred places adjoin each other in Behar, 
in the peninsula of Guzerat, on mount Abu in Rajasthan, 
as well as elsewhere. If we collate together all these corre- 
spondences in doctrine, organisation, religious observances 
and traditions, the inference seems inevitable that one of 
the two religions is a sect, and in some degree the copy of 
the other. When in addition to this we think of the manifold 
relations which there are between the legend of Buddha 
and the Brahmanical traditions, relations which are wanting 
in the legend of Mahavira ; when we reflect, moreover, 
that Buddhism has on its behalf the testimony of the edicts 
of Asoka, and that from that time, the third century before 
our era, it was in possession of a literature, some of the titles 
of which have been transmitted to us, while the most ancient 
testimonies of an unquestionable nature in favour of Jainism 
do not go farther back than the fifth century after Christ ; 
when we reflect further that the chief sacred language of 
the Buddhists, the Pali, is almost as ancient as these edicts, 
while that of the Jainas, the Ardha-Magadhi, is a prakrit 



PLURALISTIC REALISM OF THE JAINAS 291 


dialect obviously more recent ; when we add to all these the 
conclusions, very uncertain it is true, in the present state 
of our knowledge, which are furnished by the internal char- 
acteristics of Jainism, such as its more mature systematisa- 
tion, its tendency to expatiate, and the pains it is always 
taking to demonstrate its antiquity, we shall feel no 
hesitation in admitting that of the two. Buddhism is 
the one which is best entitled to the claim of originality.” 1 
Colebrooke, however, contends that Jainism is older than 
Buddhism, since it adopts the animistic belief that nearly 
everything is possessed of a soul. 2 Either view goes against 
the Indian tradition which looks upon Jainism and Buddhism 
as two distinct faiths. The Hindu sastras never confuse 
them, and their testimony is confirmed by the researches 
of Guerinot, Jacobi and Biihler, among others. It is now 
conclusively established that Vardhamana was an historical 
person distinct from Gautama Buddha and Jainism a system 
quite independent of Buddhism. Guerinot has emphasised 
five great points of difference between Vardhamana and 
Gautama Buddha relating to their birth, the deaths of their 
mothers, their renunciation, illumination and death. Vard- 
hamana was born at Vaisall about 599 b.c., while Gautama 
was born at Kapilavastu about 567 B.c. Vardhamana’s 
parents lived up to a good old age, while Gautama’s mother 
died soon after giving birth to him. Vardhamana assumed 
the ascetic life with the consent of his relatives, while 
Gautama made himself a monk against the wishes of his 
father. Vardhamana had twelve years of ascetic preparation, 
while Gautama obtained illumination at the end of six 
years. Vardhamana died at Pawa in 527 b.c., while Gautama 
died at Kusinagar about 488 b.c. Jacobi attempts to prove 
the priority and independence of Jainism to Buddhism by 
several distinct lines of evidence which we shall briefly 
indicate here, referring the interested reader to his learned 
discussions . 3 The Nigganthas (those who have no bonds) 
of the Buddhist books are the followers of Vardhamana, 
and must be at least as old as the fourth century b.c., if not 

1 Barth : The Religions of India, pp. 148-150. 

• Colebrooke : Miscellaneous Essays, ii., p. 276. 

s See Introduction to vols. xxii and x!v , S.B.E. 


von. 1 


10 * 



292 INDIAN PHILOSOPHY 

older. The Ndtaputta of Pali Buddhist literature is Vard- 
hamana. A reference to the doctrine of the Nigganthas, as 
given in Buddhist canonical literature, confirms the identity 
of the Nigganthas and the Jains. “The Niggantha Nata- 
putta. . . knows and sees all things, claims perfect know- 
ledge and faith ; teaches the annihilation by austerities of 
the old karma and prevention by inactivity of new 
karma. When karma ceases, misery ceases.” 1 * 3 Asoka’s edicts 
refer to the sect of the Jains.* The Buddhist books them- 
selves refer to the Jainas as the rivals of Buddhism. 
Internal evidence confirms the view of independence. The 
Jaina theory of the soul and knowledge are so distinctive 
of Jainism and dissimilar to those of Buddhism that one 
cannot be a borrowed product of the other. The similarities 
in doctrine between the two on the questions of karma 
and rebirth prove nothing, since these are the common features 
of all Indian systems. For these reasons we look upon 
Jainism as an earlier creed than Buddhism. M. Poussin 
is of opinion that the Jains were “ a powerful mendicant 
order which originated or was reorganised a few years before 
Sakyamuni.” 3 

According to Colebrooke, Jainism and Samkhya philo- 
sophy have some points in common. They both believe 
in the eternity of matter and the perpetuity of the world. 
The dualism of the one is not unlike that of the other. 
Only while the Saiiikhya derives the development of the 
material world and living beings from the principles of purusa 
and prakrti, the Jains trace them all to primeval nature. 4 
The similarity is only apparent. The Jaina conception of 
the activity of the soul has more in common with the 
Nyaya-Vaiserika theory than with the Samkhya view of 
the unaffected and inactive nature of the soul ; nor do we 

1 S C.E., vol. xxii., t>p. xv 2 . Buddliugliosa’s Commentary on Brahma- 
jalasutta o f the I ighanil.aya refers to the view of cold water possessing life, 
as also the Jama deni.-l of the a;Ivaka doctrine tl-.at the soul has colour. 
Samaimaphdlasutta p {• pe^.bly to the four vows of Parivanatha. In 
Majjhima Xikaya (56) and MaLd'-agga (vi. 31), v.e have accounts of the 
conversion by Buddha of the lay dmcipks of Vardhamana. 

» See Vincent Smith : Asoka, pp. 192-193. 

3 The Way to iXina.ja, p. 67. 

< T a t vn r 1 h S d h i gain a Sutra, Commentary on, iii. 6. 



PLURALISTIC REALISM OF THE JAINAS 293 


find much agreement between the two in any essential 
doctrine such as causation. 

Attempts are sometimes made by students of Jainism to 
represent it as a revolt of the critical fair-minded Ksatriya, 
against the clever unscrupulous Brahmin, who disallowed to 
all others the privilege of entering on the fourth order of 
the sannyasins, and claimed exclusive control of the sacrifices. 
Such a theory cannot be sustained when we realise that 
the Brahmin made no such claim as regards the order of the 
sannyasin, for all the upper classes were allowed to pass 
through the asramas. Were the exclusiveness of the Brahmin 
the cause of revolt, it should have been led not by the 
Ksatriyas, who were as good or as bad as the Brahmins in 
this respect, but by the other classes. We have no reason 
to believe that the suffering of the common people led to 
the rise of Jainism. It is an expression of the general ferment 
of thought which prevailed at the beginning of the epic 
period, and we need not invent any anti-Brahmin prejudice 
for an explanation of its rise. When different views of life 
and doctrine professed by different peoples come into touch 
with each other, there is bound to be an interpenetration 
of thought, giving rise to an extraordinary development of 
feeling and belief, and Jainism is one manifestation of this 
mental unrest. 

The doctrine of rebirth enunciated in the Upanisads, 
sometimes in an extravagant form, led to the idea that all 
things in the world possessed souls. Naturally the Jaina 
believed that every material thing, fire, wind and plant, 
also had a spirit in it. On such a view the simple joy of 
the earlier peoples in sacrifices could not last. The times 
were ripe for revolt. The belief that all things, animals 
and insects, plants and leaves, were possessed of souls, when 
coupled with the idea of rebirth, led to a horror of taking life 
in any form. Vardhamana insisted that we should not 
injure life whether in sport or in sacrifice. To strengthen 
the position of protest, the Jains denied God for whose 
propitiation the sacrifices were being offered. God cannot 
be held responsible for the sorrows of life. Jainism seeks 
to show’ a way out of the misery of life by austerity, inward 
and outward. When we become perfect, we do not escape 



294 INDIAN PHILOSOPHY 

into a nirvana of nothingness, but enter into a state of being 
without qualities and relations, and removed from all chances 
of rebirth. 

The Jaina system is looked upon as unorthodox (avaidika), 
since it does not accept the authority of the Veda. It is 
not therefore possible for it to look upon its own system 
of thought as a mere revelation by the Jina. Its claim to 
acceptance is its accordance with reality. Its scheme of 
the universe is said to be based on logic and experience. 
In their metaphysics, the Jainas accept the Vedic realism, 
though they do not systematise it in the spirit of the Upani- 
sads. Prakrti is analysed and given an atomic constitution. 
The purusas cease to be passive spectators, but become 
active agents. The central features of Jaina philosophy 
are its realistic classification of being, its theory of knowledge, 
with its famous doctrines of Syadvada and Saptabhangi, 
or seven-fold mode of predication and its ascetic ethics. Here, 
as in the other systems of Indian thought, practical ethics 
is wedded to philosophical speculation. The realistic 
metaphysics and ascetic ethics may have come down to 
Vardhamana from his predecessors, but the theory of 
knowledge is probably due to him, and is not without its 
interest to the modern student of the history of philosophy. 

V 

Theory of Knowledge 

The Jains admit five kinds of knowledge : mati, £ruti, 
avadhi, manahparyaya and kevala. 1 (i) Mati is ordinary 
cognition, obtained by normal means of sense perception. It 
includes .-'inrti or remembrance and sarnjna or pratyabhijna 
or recognition ; curitaor tarka, or induction based on observa- 
tion ; abhinibodha or anumana, or deductive reasoning. 2 
Matijnana is sometimes distinguished into three kinds, viz. 
upalabdhi or perception, bhavana or memory, and upayoga 
or understanding. 3 Matijnana is knowledge by means of 

■ U.T.S., i. 9, and D.S. 5. 

* P. 41. For the Jaina view of the syllogism, see the chapter on the 
Nvaya in vol. ii. 

1 P. 42. 



PLURALISTIC REALISM OF THE JAINAS 295 


the indriyas or the senses and mind, which is called anindriya, 
to distinguish it from senses. We always have sense pre- 
sentation or darsana prior to the rise of matijnana. (2) £ruti 
or testimony is knowledge derived through signs, symbols 
or words. While matijnana gives us knowledge by acquaint- 
ance, this gives only knowledge by description. Srutajnana 
is of four kinds, namely, labdhi or association, bhavana or 
attention, upayoga or understanding, and naya or aspects 
of the meaning of things. 1 Naya is noticed here since the 
different interpretations of the scriptural texts come up for 
discussion. (3) Avadhi is direct knowledge of things even 
at a distance of time or space. It is knowledge by clairvoy- 
ance. (4) Manahparyaya is direct knowledge of the thoughts 
of others, as in telepathic knowledge of others’ minds. 
(5) Kevala or perfect knowledge comprehends all substances 
and their modifications. 2 It is omniscience unlimited by 
space, time or object. To the perfect consciousness the 
whole reality is obvious. This knowledge, which is indepen- 
dent of the senses, which can only be felt and not described, 
is possible only for purified souls free from bondage. 

The first three kinds of knowledge are liable to error, 
while the last two cannot be wrong. 3 The validity of know- 
ledge consists in its practical efficiency, in its enabling us 
to get what is good and avoid what is evil. Valid know- 
ledge is a faithful representation of objects, and is therefore 
practically useful. Invalid knowledge represents things in 
relations in which they do not exist. When we mistake a 
rope for a snake, our error consists in seeing a snake where 
it is not. Invalid knowledge is subject to contradiction, 
while valid knowledge is not so. Erroneous knowledge is 
what is characterised by sam£aya or doubt (affecting mati 
and sruti), viparyaya or mistake, or the opposite of truth 
(which may be found in avadhi), and anadhyavasaya or 
w'rong knowledge caused by carelessness or indifference. 
We have eight kinds of knowledge, the five right and the 
three wrong ones. Only one kind of knowdedge is active 
at a time.4 

Knowledge is pratyaksa or direct, when it is immediate 


* P- 43- 

1 U.T.S.. i. 31, p. 42. 


• U.T.S., i. 29. 
4 U T S., 1. 30. 



296 


INDIAN PHILOSOPHY 


and paroksa or indirect when it is mediated by some other 
kind of knowledge. Of the five kinds of knowledge, mati 
and sruti are paroksa and the rest pratyaksa. 1 Mati 
or ordinary cognition which we obtain by the senses and mind 
is paroksa, since there is dependence on the senses.- There 
are some, however, who view sense knowledge as pratyaksa 
or direct. “ Perception or darsana is of four kinds, perception 
through visual sensations, perception through non-visual 
senses, again that through the faculty of avadhi or clairvoy- 
ance, and lastly through kevala or infinite perception, which 
is unlimited and apprehends all reality.” 3 

Caitanya or consciousness is the essence of jlva, and the 
two manifestations of caitanya are perception (darsana) 
and intelligence (jnana).r In darsana the details are not 
perceived, while in jnana they are. The former is simple 
apprehension, the latter conceptual knowledge. “ That 
perception of the generalities (samanya) of things without 
particularities (vi£esa) in which there is no grasping of 
details is called darsana.5 It involves several stages, which 
are : (r) Vyanjanavagraha, where the stimulus acts on the 
peripheral ends of the sense organs and brings the subject 
into a certain relation with the object ; ( 2 ) Arthavagraha, 

1 U.T.S., i. 11 and 12. » U.T.S., i. 14. 

1 P. 48. See also Siddhasena Divakara, Nvavavatara, 4. Sometimes 
pratyaksa is said to be of two kinds, saiiivyavaharika and paramarthika. 
The latter includes avadhi, manahparyaya and kevala, and the former both 
what is caused by the senses (indriyanibandliana) and wh .t is not caused 
by them (anlndriyanibandhana). The Saiiivyavaharika pratyaksa is what 
we have in everyday life and on it perception and memory depend. It is 
defined by the Pramdnamimamsavrtti as the act of satisfying a desire 
to cognise. 'Samiclnali pravrttinivrttirupo vyavahlrah saiiivyavaharah. 
Pratyaksa is entire or sakala in the case of kevalin’s knowledge and vikala, 
or deficient in other cases.) Parok-a is divided into five kinds : of (1) smrta 
or memory- of what is already experienced, as when we remember a man 
whom we saw before; (2) pratyabhij 'a. or knowledge derived from resem- 
blances of things, as when we identify a new object with something about 
which we read before; (3) tarka, or reasoning from universals ; (4) anumana 
or knowledge by means of the middle term ; and (5) figama or verbal 
testimony of an undent being. In the PraindnanayataW al ihalamhara, 
the distinction betwee n direct (pratyaksa) and indirect (paroksa) knowledge 
is said to be one of degree of clearness. See II and III. It is, because, accord- 
ing to the Jains, the outer sense activity is only ar. indirect help to the rise 
of perceptual knowledge. 

‘ D.S., 4 . " I D.S.. 43- 



PLURALISTIC REALISM OF THE JAINAS 297 


where consciousness is excited and a sensation felt, where 
the person is barely conscious of the object ; (3) lha, where 
the mind desires to know the details of the object, its resem- 
blances to and differences from others ; (4) Avaya, where 
takes place the reintegration of the present and the past, 
and the recognition of the object as this and not that; and 
(5) Dharana, where we recognise that sensations reveal quali- 
ties of things. An impression 1 results by which we are able to 
remember the object later. This analysis reveals the mediate 
character of perception, and also tells us that things are 
extra-mental realities. The existence of an objective reality 
beyond and beside consciousness, apprehended by percep- 
tion and understood by intelligence, is asserted by the Jainas. 
The attributes and relations of things are directly given in 
experience and are not products of thought or imagination. 
The process of knowing does not modify the object of know- 
ledge. The relation between knowledge and its object is an 
external one with regard to physical objects, though it is 
different in the case of self-consciousness. The consciousness 
of the jlva is ever active, and this activity reveals its own 
nature as well as that of the object. Jheya or object of 
knowledge includes self and not self. As light reveals 
itself and other objects, even so does jhana reveal itself 
and others. The Nyaya-Vaisesika theory, that knowledge 
reveals only external relations but not itself, is rejected by 
the Jainas. In knowing any object, the self knows itself 
simultaneously. If it did not know its own existence, 
none else could impart this knowledge to it. Every act 
of perception and knowledge implies the statement “ I know 
it thus and thus.” Knowledge is always appropriated by 
the self. The question, how consciousness can reveal 
the nature of unconscious objects, is dismissed as absurd, 
since it is the nature of knowdedge to reveal objects. 

In the case of self-consciousness, the relation between 
knowledge (jfiana) and the object of knowledge (jneya) 
is very intimate. Jhanin and jnana, the subject of know- 
ledge and knowledge are also inseparable, though distinguish- 
able. In self-consciousness, the subject of knowledge, the 
object of knowledge, and knowledge itself are different 

■ S.imskara. 



298 INDIAN PHILOSOPHY 

aspects of a single concrete unity. There are no jivas 
without jnana, since that would take away the cetana or 
conscious character of the jivas and reduce them to the 
level of ajiva dravyas, and there can be no jnana without 
selves, for that would make jnana foundationless. 

In its perfect condition the soul is pure jnana and darsana 
(knowledge and intuition), 1 which arise simultaneously, 
or are together. In the mundane jivas, jnana is preceded 
by darsana. 2 Perfect knowledge is free from doubt (samsaya), 
perversity (vimoha) and indefiniteness (vibhrama).3 The 
karmas which obscure the different varieties of darsana 
are called the Darsanavaranlya karmas, and those which 
obscure the different kinds of jnana are called the jhana- 
varaniya karmas. 4 All knowledge is in the soul, though it 
manifests itself when the disturbing media are removed. 
The impediments are passions and emotions, which cause 
the inflow of matter and prevent the soul from exercising 
its natural function in full measure, and interests in 
the physical concerns of life which coniine our know- 
ledge to the immediately useful. So aspects of reality 
in which we are not interested are shut off by selective 
attention. When the soul is unimpeded by the influences 
of matter which obscure knowledge, and freely functions, 
it is capable of omniscience, or knowledge of all things, 
past, present and future. In our empirical lives, the purity 
of the soul is defiled by the absorption of the unconscious 
substance, matter. By tearing it asunder, by destroying 
its energies, we tend to increase our knowledge. When 
the opposing energies are completely overthrown, the soul 
vibrates at its natural rhythm and exercises its function of 
unlimited knowing. Souls are substances characterised 
by intelligence, and their differences are due to the degrees 
of their connexions with matter. 

Knowledge is of two forms, pramdna, or knowledge of a 
thing as it is in itself, and nay a, or knowledge of a thing in its 
relation. The doctrine of nayas or standpoints is a peculiar 
feature of the Jaina logic. A naya is a standpoint from which 
we make a statement about a thing. We define and separate 

1 D.S., 6. a D.S., 44. 3 D.S., 42. 

4 For a classification of these, see Jami : Outlines of Jainism, pp. 30-31. 



PLURALISTIC REALISM OF THE JAINAS 299 


our standpoints by abstraction. The conceptions that 
belong to them, or partial views, are the outcome of purposes 
that we pursue. The result of this abstraction and concen- 
tration on particular ends is the relativity of knowledge. 
To occupy one particular standpoint is not to deny the 
others. For certain purposes the view that the sun goes 
round the earth is quite as effective as the other, that the 
earth goes round the sun. Even in the Upanisads we have 
glimpses of how reality reveals itself in different ways at 
different stages of our knowledge. Much of the confusion 
of Buddhism is due to its false exaggeration of the relative 
principle of flow into the absolute truth. What is true 
from one standpoint may not be true from another. Par- 
ticular aspects are never adequate to the whole reality. The 
relative solutions are abstractions under which reality may 
be regarded, but do not give us a full and sufficient account 
of it. Jainism makes basic and fundamental the principle 
that truth is relative to our standpoints. The general 
character of reality is given in several partial views. 

There are many ways in which nayas are divided, and 
we shall notice the chief of them here. According to one 
scheme, there are seven nayas, of which four refer to objects 
or meanings, and three to words, and all these lead to falla- 
cies (abhasas) when taken as absolute and entire. The artha 
(object or meaning) nayas are the following : — 

(i) Naigamanaya. There are two ways in which it is 
interpreted. It is said that it relates to the purpose or end 
of a course of activity which is present throughout. When 
we see a man carrying water, fire, utensils, etc., and we ask 
him, “ What are you doing ? ” he says, “ I am cooking food,” 
we have an illustration of Naigamanaya. It tells us of the 
general purpose which controls the series of acts and empha- 
sises the teleological character of life. 1 This view is adopted 
by Pujyapada. Siddhasena adopts a different view. We 
have naigamanaya when we comprehend a thing as having 
both generic and specific qualities and we do not distin- 
guish between them. (2) Samgrahanaya emphasises the 
common features. It is the class point of view. 
Though it is true that the class is not real apart from 

1 See commentary on T.S., I. 33. 



300 INDIAN PHILOSOPHY 

individuals, it is sometimes useful to notice the general 
features. This Sarhgrahanaya is of two kinds, Parasariigraha 
or the ultimate class view, which takes into account the fact 
that all things partake of the nature of reality. Aparasarh- 
graha is the inferior class view. The abstract absolutist 
position is regarded as the abhasa of the Samgrahanaya. 
Jainism admits the distinction between samanya or universal 
and visesa or particular features, though it regards it as a 
relative one. Samkhya and Advaita Vedanta deny viscsas, 
while Buddhism denies samanya. Nyaya-Vaisssika accepts 
both, and looks upon the concrete thing as a complex made 
up of the universal and the particular. But Jainism con- 
siders the distinction to be a relative one, while Nyaya- 
Vaisesika looks upon it as absolute. (3) Vyavahdranaya 
is the popular conventional point of view based on empirical 
knowledge. We know things in their entirety and emphasise 
their striking individualities. The specific features arrest 
attention. The hypothesis of materialism, and we may add 
pluralism, are the abhasas of this naya. (4) Rjusutranaya 
is narrower than the Vyavaharanaya. It takes into account 
the state of a thing at a particular point or time. It over- 
looks all continuity and identity. To it the real is the 
momentary. A thing is what it is at the present moment. 
The Jains look upon it as the presupposition of the Buddhist 
philosophy. While this naya is useful to expose the hollowness 
of an abstract philosophy of “ being,” it is useless as an ulti- 
mate account of truth. The remaining three are Sabdanayas. 
(5) Sabdattaya is based on the fact that a name has the function 
of calling up to our mind the particular object referred to 
or implied by the name, whatever it be, an individual thing, 
attribute, relation or action. Each name has its own meaning, 
and different words may also refer to the same object. The 
relation between terms and their meanings is a relative one, 
and if we forget this, fallacies arise. (6) Samabhirudhanaya 
distinguishes terms according to their roots. It is an applica- 
tion of the Sabdanaya. (7) Evambhutanaya is a specialised 
form of the sixth kind. Of the various aspects and gradations 
in the manifestation of a thing, only one is contemplated 
by the root of a term, and it is this aspect that is the legiti- 
mate meaning of a term in its current usage. The same 



PLURALISTIC REALISM OF THE JAINAS 301 


thing in a different attitude must be designated by a diff erent 
term altogether. Each of these seven nayas has a larger 
extent than that which follows it. Naigama has the largest 
extent and Evambhuta the least. Each naya or point of 
1 view represents one of the many ways from which a thing 
can be looked at. If any one point of view is mistaken 
for the whole we have a nayabhasa. According to the Jains, 
the Nyaya-Vysesika, the Samkhya, the Advaita Vedanta, 
and the Buddhist systems adopt the first four nayas respec- 
tively and mistake them for the whole truth. 

The nayas are also distinguished into (i) dravyarthika, 
from the point of view of substance, and (2) paryayarthika, 
from the point of view of modification or condition. Each 
of them has several subdivisions. The dravyarthika nayas 
consider the permanent nature of things, while the paryayar- 
thika ones relate to their perishable aspects. 

Since all these standpoints are relative, we have also 
what is called the NayanEcaya, or the true and com- 
plete point of view. The Niscayanaya is of two kinds, 
SuddhanEcaya and Asuddhaniscaya. The former deals 
with the pure unconditioned reality, while the latter contem- 
plates conditioned existence. 

To those familiar with the conception of philosophy as 
a criticism of categories, we need not say that this doctrine 
of nayas or standpoints is a logical one. The Jains are 
fond of quoting the old story of the six blind men, who each 
laid hands on a different part of the elephant and tried to 
describe the whole animal. The man who caught the ear 
thought that the creature resembled a winnowing fan, the 
holder of the leg imagined that he was clinging to a big round 
pillar, etc. It was he who saw the whole that perceived 
that each had only a portion of the truth. Almost all 
philosophical disputes arise out of a confusion of standpoints. 
The question is often asked, whether the effect is the same 
as its material cause or different from it. That it pre-exists 
in the cause and is made manifest by the operation which 
that cause undergoes is the view of satkaryavada, adopted 
by the Vedanta and the Samkhya philosophies. The asatkar- 
yavada of the Vaisesikas urges that the effect is something 
new and did not exist before. Jainism decides the dispute 



302 INDIAN PHILOSOPHY 

by a reference to the different standpoints implied in the two. 
If we consider the effect such as a gold necklace to be a mere 
substance, it is the same as the gold of which it is made ; 
but if we look at the necklace as a modification, it is new, 
and did not exist in the mere substance of gold. The con- 
tributions which each standpoint makes are always partial 
views reached by processes of abstraction. 

The most important use of these standpoints is of course 
the Syadvada or the Saptabhangi. It is the use in seven 
different ways of judgments which affirm and negate, severally 
and jointly, without self-contradiction, thus discriminating 
the several qualities of a thing. The difficulty of predication 
is got over on the Jaina theory, since it holds that subject 
and predicate are identical from the point of view of 
substance and different from the point of view of 
modification. 

The view is called Syadvada, since it holds all knowledge 
to be only probable. Every proposition gives us only a 
perhaps, a may be or a syad. We cannot affirm or deny any- 
thing absolutely of any object. There is nothing certain 
on account of the endless complexity of things. It emphasises 
the extremely complex nature of reality and its indefiniteness. 
It does not deny the possibility of predication, though it 
disallows absolute or categorical predication. The dynamic 
character of reality can consist only with relative or con- 
ditional predication. Every proposition is true, but only 
under certain conditions, i.e. hypothetically. 

It holds that there arc seven different ways of speaking 
of a thing or its attributes, according to the point of view. 
There is a point of view from which substance or attribute 
(i) is, (2) is not, (3) is and is not, (4) is unpredicable, (5) is 
and is unpredicable, (6) is not and is unpredicable, and 
(7) is, is not and is unpredicable. 

1. Syad asti. From the point of view of its own material, 
place, time and nature, a thing is, i.e. exists as itself. The 
jar exists as made of clay, in my room at the present moment, 
of such and such a shape and size. 

2. Syad nasti. From the point of view of the material, 
place, time and nature of another thing, a thing is not, i.e. 
it is not no-tliing. The jar does not exist as made oi 



PLURALISTIC REALISM OF THE JAINAS 303 


metal, at a different place or time or of a different shape 
and size. 

3. Syad asti nasti. From the point of view of the same 
quaternary, relating to itself and another thing, it may be 
said that a thing is and is not. In a certain sense the jar 
exists and in a certain sense it does not. We say here what a 
thing is as well as what it is not. 

4. Syad avaktavya. While in three we make statements 
that a thing is in its own self and is not, as another succes- 
sively, it becomes impossible to make these statements at 
once. In this sense a thing is unpredicable. Though the 
presence of its own nature and the absence of other-nature 
are both together in the jar, still we cannot express them. 

5. Syad asti avaktavya. From the point of view of its 
own quaternary and at the same time from the joint quarter- 
nary of itself and no-thing, a thing is and is unpredicable. 
We note here both the existence of a thing and its indescriba- 
bility. 

6. Syad nasti avaktavya. From the point of view of 
the quaternary of the no-thing and at the same time from the 
joint quaternary of itself and no-thing, a thing is not and is 
also unpredicable. We note here what a thing is not as well 
as its indescribability. 

7. Syad asti nasti avaktavya. From the point of view 
of its own quarternary as well as that of no-thing and at 
the same time from the joint quaternary of itself and no-thing, 
a thing is, is not and is indescribable. We bring out the 
inexpressibility of a thing as well as what it is and what it is 
not. 1 

Of these seven possible ways of speaking about a thing 
or its attributes, the first two are the chief, the simple affirma- 
tive that a thing is in its svarupa (own form), svadravya (own 
matter), svaksetra (own place), and svakala (own time), 
and the simple negative that a thing is not in its pararupa 
(other form), paradravya (other matter), paraksetra (other 
place), and parakala (other time.) The latter is the negative 
fact. This doctrine insists on the correlativity of affirmation 
and negation. All judgments are double-edged in their 
character. All things are existent as well as non-existent 
« T.S., p. 14 ; P. 16. 



304 INDIAN PHILOSOPHY 

(sadasadatmakam ). 1 A thing is what it is and is not what it 
is not. According to this view, all negation has a positive 
basis. Even imaginary concepts like skyflower possess a 
positive basis in the two reals sky and flower, though their 
combination is unreal. It emphasises the fundamenta 1 
truth that distinction is necessary for thought. A thing 
which has nothing from which it can be distinguished is 
unthinkable. The absolute devoid of distinctions within as 
well as without is truly unthinkable. For all things which 
are objects of thought are in one sense and are not in 
another. 

Samkara and Ramanuja 2 criticise the Saptabhangi 
view on the ground of the impossibility of contradictory 
attributes co-existing in the same thing. Ramanuja writes: 
" Contradictory attributes such as existence and non-existence 
cannot at the same time belong to one thing, any more than 
light and darkness.” The Jains admit that a thing cannot 
have self-contradictory attributes at the same time and in 
the same sense. All that they say is that everything is of 
a complex nature, an identity in difference. The real 
comprehends and reconciles differences in itself. Attributes 
which are contradictory in the abstract coexist in life and 
experience. The tree is moving in that its branches are 
moving, and it is not moving since it is fixed to its place 
in the ground. It is necessary for us to know a thing clearly 
and distinctly, in its self-existence as well as in its relations 
to other objects. The second point urged by the Vedantins 
that the Saptabhangi doctrine is of no practical utility 
is an expression of personal opinion over which we need not 
linger. Nor can it be contended that the Saptabhangi 
doctrine is inconsistent with the other views of the Jaina 
philosophy. It is a logical corollary of the anekantavada, 
the doctrine of the manyness of reality. Since reality is 
multiform and ever changing, nothing can be considered 
to be existing everywhere and at all times and in all ways 
and places, and it is impossible to pledge ourselves to an 
inflexible creed 

» Si'ariipena fattvat, pararupena ca asattvat. 

» S.B., ii. 2 . 33; R.B., ii. 2. 31. 



PLURALISTIC REALISM OF THE JAINAS bCo 


VI 

Value of Jaina Logic 

Before we pass on to the next section, it may be useful 
to bring together at this point a few critical reflections 
suggested by the Jaina logic. We have incidentally mentioned 
the strong points of the theory of knowledge of the Jainas 
and defended it against the attacks of the Vedantins. Yet in 
our opinion the Jaina logic leads us to a monistic idealism, 
and so far as the Jainas shrink from it they are untrue to 
their own logic. We shall enforce this criticism from the 
metaphysical side at a later stage of our discussion. Let 
us here understand the implications of the Jaina logic. 

The theory of relativity cannot be logically sustained 
without the hypothesis of an absolute. It is true that the 
law of contradiction on which Jaina logic takes its stand 
involves that distinction is necessary for thought, but a 
thing which is absolutely distinct from others is as unreal 
to thought as a thing which is absolutely one with others. 
Thought is not mere distinction, but it is also relation. 
Everything is possible only in relation to and as distinct 
from others. The law of contradiction is the negative aspect 
of the law of identity. All distinction presupposes unity. 
Since for the Jainas thought furnishes the clue to reality, 
the final expression of reality must be a concrete monism 
that accounts for all existence. It is not a one excluding 
the many, or a many excluding order or unity. The Jaina 
logic revolts against all abstractions, and will not commit 
itself to any false distinction of either-or, one or many. The 
Jainas admit that things are one in their universal aspect 
(jati or karana) and many in their particular aspect (vyakti 
or karya). Both tin se, according to them, are partial 
points of view. A plurality of reals is admittedly a relative 
truth. We must rise to the complete point of view and look 
at the whole with all the wealth of its attributes. If Jainism 
stops short with plurality, which is at best a relative and 
partial truth, and does not ask whether there is any higher 
truth pointing to a one which particularises itself in the 



306 INDIAN PHILOSOPHY 

objects of the world, connected with one another vitally, 
essentially and immanently, it throws overboard its own 
logic and exalts a relative truth into an absolute one. 

Only such a theory of monism is consistent with the 
Jaina theory of relations which are not independent of 
and external to what they relate. Meaning enters into 
reality, and between subject and object there is an intimate 
relation. The dualism of mind and external world, whatever 
truth it may have at the psychological level, is overcome 
when we rise to the standpoint of logic as theory of know- 
ledge. If the two, subject and object, the individual mind 
and the independent reality, are separate, then there can be 
no knowledge at all. Either knowledge is arbitrary and 
groundless or the dualism is w'rong. Subject and object are 
not separate existences held together by an external bond. 
They are a unity in duality, a duality in unity. If w'e 
suppress either term, the whole is dissolved. The distinction 
of subject and object is not a relation between two inde- 
pendent entities, but a distinction made by knowledge 
itself within its own field. If Jaina logic does not recognise 
the need for this principle, which includes within it the 
distinction of subject and object, it is because it takes a 
partial view for the whole truth. 

If we are to accept the above interpretation of its principle 
of relativity, the self which takes up the different points of 
view cannot be the particular empirical self, but something 
deeper. Knowledge is not merely individual. If the analysis 
of reality is to be more than subjective, we must admit the 
activity of one self in the many individuals whom we know 
empirically as objects of knowledge. Before any question 
of knowledge arises, this one self must be presupposed as 
the ultimate and final fact within which fall all distinctions 
of subject and object. And this self is not a passing feeling 
or a transient phase of consciousness. 

The fact that w'e are conscious of our relativity means 
that w'e have to reach out to a fuller conception. It is from 
that higher absolute point of view that the lower relative 
ones can be explained. All true explanation is from above 
downwards. 

It is only in the light of this absolute principle that we 



PLURALISTIC REALISM OF THE JAINAS 307 


shall be able to apply a scale of values to the relative con- 
ceptions and estimate their worth. All truth is relative 
when compared with the absolute truth. All knowledge 
transcends the given and points beyond itself. With a 
continuous advance towards fuller and fuller truth, the object 
itself loses its apparently given character. When we reach 
absolute knowledge the distinction between subject and 
object is overcome. Only in the light of such an absolute 
standard could we correct the abstractions of the lower. 
Then shall we see that the several relatives are only stages 
in a continuous process which has the realisation of the 
soul’s freedom for its determining end. The recognition 
of every form of knowledge as relative, something bound to 
pass over into something else, requires us to assume a larger 
reality, an absolute in which all the relatives fall. 

But is there any way of comprehending the nature 
of this absolute ? We cannot get an idea of the positive 
full-orbed reality by putting together our partial views. A 
mere pooling of the contributions of the different standpoints 
will not lead us to the truth in itself. If we follow the spirit 
of Jaina logic, thought is bound up with the relative and 
cannot give us a knowledge of the absolute. If thought 
cannot grasp reality, is there any other power that can ? 
The question is not explicitly raised, but the answer is 
implicitly given in the affirmative. A careful consideration 
of Kevalajnana, or the knowledge possessed by the free, 
will tell us that the Jaina theory by implication accepts the 
method of intuition and the philosophy of absolutism. 

According to the Jaina theory, the highest kind of know- 
ledge which combines all the characters manifested in 
experience is that possessed by the Kevalin or the liberated. 
It is full or perfect knowledge which is the soul’s characteristic 
in its pure and undefiled condition. This perfect knowledge 
which is the essence of the soul, manifests itself in different 
degrees in different kinds of beings on account of the influence 
of the external force of matter wdiose association or union 
has the effect of suppressing the clear knowledge of the 
soul. This unconscious matter, w'hen it joins the soul 
substance, cripples its powers according to the type of bondage 
or fusion of soul and matter The different types of con- 



308 


INDIAN PHILOSOPHY 


sciousness depend on the operation of the opposing forces 
of matter, ranging from that in which these forces are actually 
in full play, in which case the knowing power of the soul 
can manifest itself only through the one sense of touch, 
as in metals and the like, to that in which all of them are 
removed, when the full blaze of omniscience is reached. The 
intermediate types between these two limits are determined 
by the destruction, entire or partial, of the energies obstructing 
knowledge. Knowledge which is of the essence of the soul, 
is hidden or revealed according to the pressure of matter 
upon it. Everything lies latent in the self, and only wants 
removal of the causes which prevent the manifestation 
of knowledge. When the impediments are removed, the 
soul becomes all comprehensive knowledge, unlimited by 
time or space. There are no emotions to disturb or interests 
to obscure the full splendour of that soul whose essence is 
consciousness. Nor can we say that there are differentiating 
marks in this perfect condition. The object of knowledge 
is the whole of reality, and the subject has become pure 
intelligence, wherein no limits or distinctions are possible. 
The unreal distinctions of the empirical world are no longer 
present in it. In short, the distinctions are due to an element 
which docs not persist, and what persists is the soul whose 
nature is consciousness. The Jainas cannot logically support 
a theory of pluralism. 


VII 

Psychology 

Before we take up the metaphysical views of the Jainas, 
we may notice their psychological opinions. They admit 
a dualism between mind and body. The five senses or 
indriyas are distinguished into dravya-indriyas or physical 
sense organs and bhava-indriyas or their psychical counter- 
parts . 1 The common element between the eye which is 

* T.S., ii. 19. Similarly, manas has the two aspects of physical and 
psychical. When the soul is said to occupy the whole body, it means that 
soul and body are the psychical and physical counterparts of one entity. 
It is an empty device to account for the psychical perception of physical 
objects. We do not solve the problem of the relation of soul and body by 
repeating the properties of both in every sense or indriya. 



PLURALISTIC REALISM OF THE JAINAS 309 


the enjoyer of form and its object is colour. Tire eye is 
adapted to respond to colour, which is a property of matter. 
Since the sense organs are only the exteriorised powers 
or instruments of the jlva, the elements which render the 
enjoyment of all objects possible exist in the constitution 
of the soul itself. The senses are the capacities for enjoy- 
ment, and the sensible qualities which exist outside are 
the objects of enjoyment. A good deal of psychological 
analysis is discernible in the divisions of touch into eight 
kinds : hot and cold, rough and smooth, soft and hard, 
light and heavy ; of taste into five : pungent, acid, bitter, 
sweet and astringent ; of smell into two : good and bad ; 
of colour into five : black, blue, yellow, white and pink ; 
and sound into seven: sadja, rsabha, gandhara, madh- 
yama, pancama, daivata, nisada, i.e. do, re, me, fa, 
sol, la, si. Sense perception is the result of the contact 
between the sense organ and the object. This mechanical 
contact is not the complete explanation of the psychical per- 
ception. It only helps to remove the veil which hides 
the knowledge of the soul. The subject is a jnanin, a 
bhoktr as well as a kartr, a knower, an enjoyer 
and a doer. Three forms of consciousness are recognised : 
knowing, feeling, or the experiencing of the fruits of karma 1 
and willing.* Conation and feeling are closely allied. As a 
rule, we have first feeling, then conation, and lastly know- 
ledges The relation between jlva and pudgala is that of 
subject to object. The force which brings about their union 
is not knowledge, for we may know a thing and yet not be 
compelled to act on it. The omniscience of the Siddhatman 
involves the reflection of the universe in consciousness, 
though the soul is not necessarily in bondage. Interaction 
depends on the desires of the jlva. This subjection to desire 
and consequently to bondage is not essential for the jiva, 
since it is possible to be saved from desire. 

Every jlva is a composite of body and soul, of which the 
soul is the active partner, while the body is the inactive 
passive one. Jainism avoids the defects of both mentalism 
and materialism by recognising the correlativity of mind 
and matter. But Jainism does not see that the distinction 
1 Karmaphalacetana. * P. 38. I P. 39. 



310 INDIAN PHILOSOPHY 

of self and not-self is the outcome of the essential character 
of mind. It accepts the two substance theory in all its 
nakedness, looking upon knowledge as something apart - 
a process taking place between them. Nor is Jainism aware 
of the conception of development according to which the body 
in its higher phases assumes new properties. It is obliged 
to rest content with a dualism of mind and body and stop 
at the psychological point of view. It cannot adopt the 
theory of interaction, but has to accept the view of parallelism 
with all its difficulties. “ Karmic matter itself through its 
own essential nature brings about its own changes. Jiva, 
too, in the same way, through its own impure states of thought 
that are conditioned by karma, brings about its own thought 
changes.” 1 The two form two independent series, self- 
sufficient and complete. To the question, as to why the 
jiva should suffer the fruits of karma, if the two are inde- 
pendent, a sort of pre-established harmony is suggested. 2 In 
the world we have material bodies large and small, of which 
some are karmic matter, with a tendency to be attracted 
by the jivas. By their coexistence, jiva and karmic 
material molecules are brought together. The settling of 
karmic matter in jiva is due to this contiguous coexistence. 
It cannot be said that the mind exerts an active influence. 
The commentator on Pancastikayasamayasara explains 
the relation by the analogy of the casket which becomes 
black by contact with collyrium powder. The two self- 
determining agencies somehow get harmoniously blended. 
Since direct causal relation between the two series is rejected, 
no better explanation than a mysterious harmony is possible. 

On this view knowledge becomes a mystery. It ceases 
to be the ultimate fact behind which we cannot go. We 
adopt a deliberately restricted outlook and, imagining 
an opposition between subject and object, look upon mind 
as one thing confronted by another thing called the environ- 
ment. We do not perceive things that are external, but 
have only images and pictures of them which are supposed 
to represent the external world. There cannot be any 
agreement between idea and reality unless there is a common 
factor between them. But in that case the theory of a mind 
* P. 63 . • P. 70-77. 



PLURALISTIC REALISM OF THE JAINAS 311 

which looks out of its own chamber into an alien uni\erse 
falls to the ground. 

The soul is said to have dimensions, and be capable of 
expansion and contraction. The soul cannot be smaller 
than the physical body, for then it will not be able to feel 
the bodily affections as its own. It is of a very small size 
when it starts in the womb, but goes on gradually expanding 
with the body, till it attains to its full proportions. At 
the end of each earthly life it contracts again into the seed 
of the next birth which it has to undergo. The diffusion of 
the soul in the body is not like any other diffusion in nature, 
since the soul is simple and devoid of parts. “ Just as the 
lotus hued ruby, when placed in a cup of milk imparts its 
lustre to the milk, so the jiva residing in its own body imparts 
its lustre or intelligence to the whole body.” 1 The souls 
which are infinite in number and of medium size occupy in- 
numerable points of space in lokaka^a or the mundane world. 1 
According to 5Samkara,3 the hypothesis of the soul having the 
same size as its body is untenable, for, from its being limited 
by the body, it would follow that the soul, like the body, is 
also impermanent, and if impermanent, it would have no 
final release. Further, a soul which leaves a particular body 
will get into difficulties when, in the course of rebirth, it 
has to inhabit a larger body. We may grossly conceive 
the soul as capable of becoming bigger or smaller by addition 
or subtraction of parts. New particles will be constantly 
carried in and old particles will be getting out, so that we can 
never be sure that the same soul continues for any length 
of time. If it is said that certain essential particles remain 
unchanged, there does not seem to be any way of distinguish* 
ing between the essential and the accidental. The Jainas 
answer these objections by citing analogies. As a lamp 
whether placed in a small pot or a large room illumines the 
whole space, even so does the jiva contract and expand 
according to the dimensions of the different bodies. 

1 P. 33. " The soul is present,” says Maher in his Psychology, " though 

in a non-qualitative manner, throughout the whole body ; moreover it is 
so present everywhere in the entirety of its essence, although it may not 
be capable of ubiquitously therein exercising all its faculties.” 

1 Madhyamapaumana, i.e. neither ail pervading nor atomic. 

J S B., II 2. 33-36. 



812 


INDIAN PHILOSOPHY 


VIII 

Metaphysics 

In metaphysics Jainism is opposed to all theories which 
do not emphasise ethical responsibility. The ethical interest 
in human freedom is the determining consideration. The 
theories of the creation of the world by God, or its develop- 
ment out of prakrti or its unreality, are criticised on the 
ground that they cannot account for either the origin or 
the cessation of suffering. 1 To regard the intelligent subject 
as the product of the five elements is as fruitless from the 
ethical point of view as to make out that the variety of the 
world is a manifold presentation of the one intelligent prin- 
ciple. 2 3 * 5 Moral distinctions lose their value on the hypothesis 
of the passivity of the soul.3 To say that the soul is safe in 
its eternity and the events of the world are the results of 
the mechanical combination and separation of the elements 
of existence would take away the initiative from the soul 
and make moral responsibility meaningless. 4 The fatalist 
theory that all tilings are fixed by nature obviously leaves 
no room for individual effort. 5 Ethical values require that 
the individual can make or unmake himself in the world, 
and that the soul has a self-identity which it preserves 
even in the ultimate condition. 6 This metaphysical theory 
of reality may be approached by a preliminary discussion 
of the nature of substance or dravya, and mode or paryaya. 

The Jainas do not hold that being is permanent, without 
becoming, change and end. Everything is produced, con- 
tinues and is again destroyed. The definition of substance 
depends on our standpoint. It is that which always exists, as 
the universe, which has no beginning or end. It is the subject 
of qualities and modifications. Anything which has origin, 
existence and destruction is a substance. It is again that 

1 Sutrakrtanga, I. i. 3. 5-9. 

» Ibid, I. 1. 1. 7-10. 11-12 ; II. i. 16. 17, 

3 Ibid.. I. i. 1 13 

■t Ibid., I. i. 1. 15 ; fl. i. 22-24. 

5 Ibid.. I. i. 2. 1-5; I. i. 4. 8-9; II. i. 32. 

* Ibid , I. i. 3. II. 



PLURALISTIC REALISM OF THE JA1NAS 313 


which performs some functions. Generally, existing things 
are considered to be permanent as regards their substance 
and accidental as regards their changeable aspects. Material 
things continue to exist as matter ; as particular things 
they change. Being is not unalterable in its nature. The 
Jainas do not concern themselves about transcendental 
being, but only of being as found in experience. The 
things of the world undergo change, gaining new qualities 
and losing old ones. The possession of certain qualities in 
common makes us say that the new and the old are forms 
of one substance. Reality to them is a unity in difference 
and nothing beyond. They adopt a theory of bhedabheda 
or difference in identity. Substance is that which persists 
in and through its own qualities and modifications. Sub- 
stance and quality are inseparable. A thing is defined as 
that which has many qualities. 1 It is a dynamic reality, an 
identity which changes.* “ Substance is one, the inherent 
essence of all things, manifests itself through diverse forms, 
has the three characteristics of creation, destruction and 
staying, and may be described by opposites.” 3 

Qualities or gunas inhere in substances as materiality 
in atoms, and they cannot exist by themselves. The chief 
qualities are : (i) Existence, (2) Enjoyability, (3) Substan- 
tiveness, (4) Knowability, (5) Specific character or identity 
or essence, (6) the quality of possessing some kind of form. 
These general qualities are common to dravyas, and each of 
the latter has also its own specific features. \\ e should 
not abstract any of these qualities and exalt it to a sub- 
stantive level. Yet “ there is neither quality without 
substance nor substance without quality.” 4 The Nyaya 
theory of the absolute distinction of substance and quality 
is refuted. A thing exists in and through the qualities and 
the qualities constitute the thing. The difference is one 
of reference and not existence. “ If the substance is entirely 
separate and distinct from its qualities, then it may change 
into infinite other substances, or again, if the qualities can 
exist separate from their substance, there will be no necessity 

1 P. 8 ; see also 9 and xi. 1 P. 6 . 

3 “ Anantadharmatmakam vastu ’’ ; Ilaribhadra’s Saddar?anasamuc- 



314 


INDIAN PHILOSOPHY 


for a substance at all.” 1 The Nirguna Brahman theory as 
well as the Ksanikavada are implicitly refuted. 3 Substance 
and qualities may be externally related as in “ Devadatta’-s 
cow,” or internally as in the “ tall cow.” “ Just as dhana 
and jfiana (wealth and wisdom) make the owners clhani and 
jnani (rich and wise), though expressing two ways of rela- 
tionship, unity and diversity, even so the relation between 
substance and qualities implies two aspects of identity and 
difference.” 3 “ The relation between substance and quality 

is one of coeval identity, unity, inseparability and essential 
simplicity ; the unity of substance and qualities is not the 
result of union or combination. ”t 

The dravya with the qualities must exist in some form 
or state. This mode of existence is paryaya and is subject 
to change. The substance gold with its qualities of mallea- 
bility and yellowness is not subject to change. The gunas or 
qualities continue while the paryayas or forms change. There 
are two kinds of paryayas or modifications (i) Modifications 
of the essential qualities of a thing or substance. The colour 
of water may change, though colour is a constant property.5 
( 2 ) Modifications of the accidental qualities such as muddi- 
ness. Water need not always be muddy. 6 

The whole universe of being is traced to the two ever- 
lasting uncreated coexisting but independent categories of 
jiva and ajiva. The jiva is the enjoyer and the ajiva or the 
jada is the enjoyed. That which has consciousness is jiva, 
that which has not consciousness, but can be touched, 
tasted, seen and smelt, is ajiva. The latter is devoid of the 
three kinds of consciousness. It is the object.7 “ What 
knows and perceives the various objects, desires pleasure and 
dreads pain, acts beneficially or harmfully, and experiences 
the fruit thereof, that is jiva.” 8 Jiva and ajiva do not 

* p. 50 

* There is no sarnfmya without vises a and no vi-e'-a without slmnnva. 
Ma nibhadra in his Vrtti on Hanbhadra’s Saddarsanasamuecaya, 40, quotes 
a verse • “ Dravyara paryayaviyutam, paryaya dravyavarjitah kva kada 
kena kim rupa drsta manena kena ceti.” 

3 P 53. 4 P. 56. 

5 Sahabhavin paryaya. It co-exists with the substance and its qualities. 

6 Kramabhavin paryaya. It succeeds another modification. 

1 P. 132. • P. 129. 



PLURALISTIC REALISM OF THE JAINAS 315 


correspond to I and not-I. It is an objective classification 
of things in the universe that underlies the distinction 
of jiva and ajlva. Animate beings are composed of soul 
and body, and their souls being distinct from matter are 
eternal. Ajlva is divided into two main classes, those without 
form (arupa), as dharma, adharma, space, time, and those 
with form (rupa), as pudgala or matter. 

The first ajiva dravya or inanimate substance is akasa 
or space. It is divided into (i) the part occupied by the 
world of things, lokakasa, and ( 2 ) the space beyond it, the 
alokakasa, which is absolutely void and empty, an abyss 
of nothing. 1 Of a point of space or pradesa, the following 
definition is given: “ Know that something to be pradesa, 
which is obstructed by one indivisible atom of pudgala, and 
w r hich can give space to all particles.” 2 In such a pradesa 
one element of dharma, one of adharma, one particle of 
kala or time, and many atoms of matter in a subtle state 
may exist. Space by itself is not a condition of motion and 
of rest. 3 Things left together hanging in space would lead 
to chaos. To produce a cosmos they must be bound by laws 
of movement and rest. Dharma is the principle of motion. 
" Dharma is devoid of qualities of taste, colour, smell, sound 
and contact. It pervades the whole world, and is continuous 
because of inseparability ; has extension because of coexten- 
siveness with space. Though in reality of ekapradesa, yet 
in vyavahara is of many pradesas.’h It is amurta or non- 
corporeal, and is continuous and non-composite. “ Because 
it has the infinite manifestations of the incorporeal nature, 
agurulaghu, and because of its dialectic nature of persist- 
ence through appearance and disappearance, it is a real 
existence. Itself being unaffected by movement, it con- 
ditions the motion of those things that can move, matter and 
life,” 5 " even as water itself, being indifferent or neutral, is 
the condition of the movement of fish.” 6 Dharma has none of 
the specific properties of matter, and yet it is a self-subsisting 
reality devoid of all sensible qualities. It is the medium of 
movement though not its cause. Adharma is the principle 

1 P. 97 ; see also D.S., 19-20. * D S 27. 

3 P 99 and 100. 3 P. 90. S P. 9 t- 

* P. 85 95 ; see also D.S., 17, and Vardhamana Purann, xvi. 29. 

11 


VOL. I 



310 INDIAN PHILOSOPHY 

of rest. It is also devoid of sense qualities, is non-corporeal 
and coextensive with lokakasa . 1 The two principles are non- 
active, non-physical, non-atomic and non-discrete in structure. 
Dharma and adharma are neutral conditions, udasinahetu, 
of movement and rest. Efficient causes are different. Other- 
wise objects would be always moving or resting. They are 
not merely the accompanying conditions of movement and 
rest, but appear to be the cosmic principles forming the 
background of all the moving and the resting things of the 
world. They are the connecting media binding together 
the chaotic crowd of isolated fragments into an ordered 
whole. It is to be carefully noted that dharma and adharma 
in Jaina philosophy do not stand for merit and demerit, 
for which it has other terms, punya and papa. They are 
the forces that cause movement and rest. Space with dharma 
and adharma forms the condition for the subsistence of all 
things, souls and matter. Space gives room to subsist, 
dharma makes it possible for things to move or be moved 
and adharma to rest. These three functions of subsistence, 
motion and rest are assigned to space in modern philosophy. 
The three are mutually interpenetrating. From the point 
of view of locality, they are of the same size and form, an 
inseparable unity. They are distinguished because of the 
difference of functions. 

Time or kala is sometimes recognised as a quasi-sub- 
stance. It is an all-pervading form of the universe on which 
are strung the successive movements of the world. It is 
not a summation of a series of discontinuous changes, but 
a process of persistence, an enduring from the past into the 
present. 

Time has astitva or existence, but no kayatva or magni- 
tude. It has no extension, being unilateral . 3 A distinction is 
made between eternal time, without form, beginning or end, 
and relative time, with beginning and end and variations 
of hour, minute, etc. The former is called kala and the 

• P- 94- 

* See D.S.. 25. If we say that even an atom of pudgala has one pradesa 
and cannot be called kaya it is replied : " An atom, though having one prade 'a 
becomes of many prade-a-, through being pradeta m many skandhas. For 
this reason, from the ordinary point of view, the omniscient call it kaya ” 
(D.S., 26.) 



PLURALISTIC REALISM OF THE JAINAS 317 


latter samaya. Kala is the substantial cause of samaya. 
Vartana or continuity of changes is inferred from parinama 
or modification . 1 “ Relative time is determined by changes 
or motion in things. These changes themselves are the 
effects of absolute time .” 1 Time is called a cakra, a wheel. 
Since in course of time all things are liable to dissolution of 
form, time is also called the destroyer.3 

Matter or pudgala is the next category to be considered. 
“ Whatever is perceived by the senses, the sense organs, 
the various kinds of iariras (or bodies of jivas), the physical 
mind, the karmas, etc., are murta, or figured objects. These 
are all pudgala.” 4 “ Sound, union, fineness, grossness, 
shape, division, darkness, and image, with lustre and heat, 
are modifications of the substance known as pudgala.”5 
Matter is an eternal substance undetermined with regard 
to quantity and quality. It may increase or diminish in 
volume without any addition or loss of particles. It may 
assume any form and develop various qualities. It is the 
vehicle of energy which is essentially kinetic or of the nature 
of motion. This motion belongs to the substance pudgala, 
and is of two kinds, simple motion, or parispanda, and 
evolution, or parinama. Pudgala is the physical basis of 
the world. Matter itself is said to exist in six different 
forms of different degrees of fineness and visibility. The 
qualities of touch, taste, smell, colour and sound are 
associated with pudgala. The Jains argue that everything 
in the world except souls and space is produced from 
matter. Things which we perceive consist of gross matter. 
There is also subtile matter beyond the reach of our senses, 
and this is transformed into the different degrees of karma. 

The Jaina physics has for its chief principle the atomic 
structure of the universe. The physical objects apprehended 
by senses consist of atoms or paramanus. An absolutely 
homogeneous mass of pudgalas which by differentiation 
breaks up into several kinds of atoms qualitatively deter- 
mined is assumed. An atom (anu) has no points, beginning, 
middle or end. It is infinitesimal, eternal and ultimate. 

* P. 23-26 * p - io 7- Io8 - 

7 Compare “ Kalo’smi.” B.G., xi. 32. 

) P. 89. 


i D.S., 16. 



318 INDIAN PHILOSOPHY 

It is neither created nor destroyed. It is amurta (formless), 
though the basis of all murta (form). Sometimes it is raid 
to have form in the sense that it can be perceived by the 
kevali or the omniscient. The atoms are said to possess 
weight. The heavier move downwards and the lighter up- 
wards. Each atom occupies one point of space or pradesa. 1 
When in the subtle state, innumerable atoms occupy the 
space of one gross atom. Each atom has a kind of taste, 
colour, smell and contact. 2 These qualities are not per- 
manent and fixed. Material things are produced by the 
combination of atoms which are subject to mutual attraction. 
Two atoms form a compound, when one is viscous and the 
other dry, or when both are of different degrees of viscousness 
and dryness. Atomic linking takes place only when the 
atoms are of unlike natures. The attraction and repulsion 
of atoms are admitted by the Jains. The movement of 
atoms is brought about by means of space, dharma and 
adharma. The compounds, or skandhas combine with others 
and so on. Pudgala therefore exists in the two forms of 
anu, or atom, and skandha, or aggregate. The skandhas 
vary from binary aggregates to infinite compounds. Every 
perceivable object is a skandha, and the physical world as a 
whole is a mahaskandha, or the great aggregate. The changes 
of the physical universe are traced to atomic disintegration 
or aggregation. 3 We have already said that the atoms are 
not constant in their nature, but are subject to change or 
development (parinama), which consists in their assuming 
new qualities. It also follows that there are not different 
kinds of atoms answering to the different elements of earth, 
water, fire and air. The atoms by developing the character- 
istic qualities of the elements become differentiated and form 
the elements. The Nyaya-Vaisesika theory holds that 
there are as many kinds of atoms as there are elements, 
while the Jainas think that the homogeneous atoms produce 
different elements by varying combinations. The qualitative 
differences of primary atoms are denied. 4 In this matter 
the Jainas agree with Leucippus and Democritus. The 
figures formed by the arrangement of the atoms into groups 
are manifold. It is said that the atom may develop a 
1 P. 8 4 . * P. 57. 1 p. 80-83. • P. 85. 



PLURALISTIC REALISM OF THE JAINAS 319 

motion of its own so swift that it traverses in one moment 
the whole universe from one end to the other. 

Karma according to the Jains is of material nature 
(paudgalika). Only thus can the Jains conceive that thoughts 
and ideas affect our character and create or modify the 
tendencies of our souls. Karma is a substantive force, matter 
in a subtle form. The kind of matter fit to manifest karma 
fills all cosmic space. It has the peculiar property of develop- 
ing the effects of merit and demerit. The soul by its commerce 
with the outer world becomes literally penetrated with the 
particles of subtle matter. These become karma and build 
up a special body called karmanasarira, which does not 
leave the soul till its final emancipation. This karmic matter 
retards the radiance of the soul. Bhavakarma is immediate 
to the jivas, while dravyakarma belongs to the body. The 
two are associated together, though they are distinct and 
separate as the conscious and the non-conscious (cetana and 
acetana). Karma works in such a way that every change 
which takes place leaves a mark which is retained and built 
into the organism to serve as the foundation for future 
action. It is there actual and acting in the nature of the 
jivas. Five classes of karmic conditions are mentioned. 
Each of these determines its corresponding bhava or mental 
state. “ On account of the rise, suppression, annihilation, 
mixed suppression or unconditioned thought, the jiva has 
five bhavas or thought conditions .” 1 The last is uncon- 
ditioned by karma, while the four others are conditioned by 
changes on the physical side. In the usual course of things 
karma takes effect and produces its proper results. The 
soul is said to be in the Audayika state. By proper effort 
karma may be prevented from taking effect for some time. 
Though it is neutralised, it is still present, like fire covered 
by ashes. The soul is then said to be in the Aupasamika 
state. When karma is not only prevented from working, 
but is annihilated altogether, then the soul is in the Ksayika 
state which leads to moksa. There is a fourth state of the 
soul, Ksayopasamika, which partakes of the nature of all the 
preceding ones. In this condition some karma is annihilated, 
some neutralised and some active. It is the state of those 

« P. 62, udaya, upasama, ksaya, ksayopaSama, paripama. 



320 INDIAN PHILOSOPHY 

whom we call good, while the Ksayika and Aupa£amika 
states belong to holy men. 1 

The ajlva thus consists of five entities, of which four 
are immaterial, amurta, viz. space, time, dharma and 
adharma, and the fifth pudgala is material, or murta, or 
figured. These five categories constitute the world or 
loka, and beyond is the immeasurable infinite called aloka. 2 

Different from matter and material things are souls, 
jivas (literally lives). In the Jaina writings the word jlva 
is variously used, and denotes life, vitality, soul and con- 
sciousness. Jiva is living experience, which is so utterly 
unlike the physical things of the outer world. The jivas 
are infinite in number and are of different kinds, (i) Nit- 
yasiddha, or the ever perfect ; (2) Mukta, or the liberated ; 
and (3) the Baddha, or the bound. The second class of jivas 
will not become embodied. They have achieved their purity 
and dwell in a state of supramundane perfection unconcerned 
with worldly affairs. The mundane jivas are a prey to 
illusion, and are condemned to submit to the yoke of matter 
through an infinite succession of lives. The freed souls are 
absolutely pure and free from any taint of matter. In 
them the partnership between soul and matter is dissolved. 

■ When karma penetrates the soul it is transformed into eight kinds of 
prakrti which make up the karniana sarira. These eight kinds of karma 
include the Jnanavaraniya, or that which obscures the inborn knowledge 
of the soul, producing different degrees of knowledge or ignorance, and 
Darsanavaraniya, or that which obscures right intuitions ; Vedanlya, or that 
which obscures the blissful nature of the soul and produces pleasure, pain, 
and Mohaniya or that which disturbs the right attitude of the soul with 
regard to faith, conduct, passions and emotions, and produces doubt, error 
and other mental disturbances. The other four deal -with the status of 
an individual being : Ayuska. or that which determines the length of life 
in one birth ; Kama or that which produces the various circumstances or 
elements which collectively make up an individual existence, the body with 
its general and specific qualities ; Gotra, or that which determines the 
nationality, caste, family and social standing of an individual ; and Antarava, 
or that which obstructs the inborn energy of the soul and prevents the doing 
of good even when there is a desire for it. 

Connected with the karma theory is the doctrine of lesyas, of which there 
are six. The totality of karmas taken up by a soul induce in it a trans- 
cendental colour or complexion which cannot be perceived by the naked 
eye. These have a moral bearing. The state of a soul is produced by its 
inborn nature and the karma with which it is associated. Each kind of 
karma has its predestined limits within which it must be purged off. 

* P- 3- 



PLURALISTIC REALISM OF THE JAINAS 321 


They are the nirupadhi jivas, which lead a life of pure exist- 
ence and infinite consciousness, and possess infinite know- 
ledge (anantaj nana), infinite perception (anantadarsana), 
infinite power (anantavirya) and infinite bliss (ananta- 
sukha). The sopadhi jivas, which are wandering in the 
circle of existence, are pursued by the cruel parasite matter. 
Through ignorance the jiva identifies itself with matter. 
It is clear that jiva in the sense of the freed indicates the 
pure subject, which is simple and incorruptible. It answers 
to the Upanisad Atman, the logical, self-existing, unchange- 
able subject precedent to all cognition, feeling and will. 
As applied to the impure samsarin, jiva is an empirical 
category determined by life. This ambiguous usage is 
responsible for a good deal of confusion in the Jaina meta- 
physics. Except in final release the soul is always in connec- 
tion with matter, the link between the two being karma. 
The soul persists throughout all changes and is not a product 
of the body. The Jains admit that there is no creation 
of a new substance or destruction of the old. It is only 
a fusion of elements in a new form. The jivas are many, 
but are alike eternal. Their characteristic essence is con- 
sciousness or cetana, which is never destroyed, however 
much it is obscured by external causes. They are regarded 
as possessing size which is varying in different cases. They 
contract and expand according to the dimensions of the 
body with which they are incorporated for the time being. 
The question of the different kinds of jivas is important 
for the Jainas, in view of their insistence on ahimsa, or the 
inviolability of life. Jivas are divided according to the 
number of sense organs they possess. The highest are those 
which have five senses : touch, taste, smell, sight and 
hearing (pancendriya). The lowest have one sense, touch 
(ekendriya). Between the two come those with two, three 
and four senses. The higher animals, men and gods, possess 
a sixth internal organ (manas), and are said to be rational . 1 
The senses and bodies do not constitute the essence of the 
soul, which lies in the consciousness underlying them all . 2 
The soul is not distinct from its attribute of jnana or know- 
ledge, and since the ways of knowledge are diverse, the 
■ See P. 118-126. * P - 128. 



322 INDIAN PHILOSOPHY 

world of reality is also said to be multiverse by the wise.* 
Self and its knowledge are inseparable. In unredeemed 
souls knowledge and joy are contracted. Everything from 
the solar system to the dewdrop has a soul, and not merely 
men and animals. There are elemental souls, e.g. earth souls, 
fire souls, which live and die and are born again in the same 
or other elemental bodies. These are either gross or subtle. 
In the latter case they are invisible. Plants are the jivas 
of one sense. Each plant may be the body of one soul, or 
may possess a multitude of embodied souls. Though some 
other Indian philosophers also admit that plants possess 
souls, the Jaina thinkers have developed this theory in 
a remarkable way. Plants in which only one soul is embodied 
are always gross, and exist in the habitable part of the world 
only. But those plants of which each is a colony of plant 
lives may be subtle, and therefore invisible, and be distri- 
buted all over the world. These subtle plants are called 
nigoda. They are composed of an infinite number of souls, 
forming a very small cluster, with respiration and nutrition 
in common. Innumerable nigodas form a globule, and the 
world is packed with them. These nigodas supply souls 
in the vacancies caused by those who have attained nirvana. 
It is said that an infinitesimally small fraction of one single 
nigoda has furnished souls in place of those liberated from 
the beginninglcss past down to the present. We cannot 
therefore hope that the world will at any time be empty of 
living beings . 2 A peculiar feature of the Jaina theory is 
its doctrine that there are souls even in inorganic objects, 
like metals and stones. 

The condition of a soul depends on the condition of its 
body. In an inorganic body the soul’s consciousness is 
dormant, while it just stirs in the organic body. Conscious- 
ness is active in human beings. Compare the saying : “ All 
flesh is not the same flesh : but there is one kind of flesh 
of men, another flesh of beasts, another of fishes, and another 
of birds.” 

The jiva is characterised by knowledge, and though it 
has no form, is yet an agent enjoying the fruits of karma 

1 P. 49 ; see also 58. 

• See Lokaprakasa, vi. 31 fi. 



PLURALISTIC REALISM OF TIIE JAINAS 323 


and possessing the same extent as the body. 1 It undergoes 
real changes, otherwise it cannot be a causal agent. 3 It 
is the upadanakartr or the material cause of bhavas, or 
thoughts, while karmic matter is the nimitta, or the deter- 
mining caused The potter has the idea (bhava), and the pot 
exists in his consciousness, and there arises the actual pot 
with the material clay. Yet throughout its infinite forms 
the soul maintains its nature or identity. Birth and death 
are only paryayas, or modifications of the soul. The freed 
soul is one with the soul in sarhsarad It is not necessary 
for the soul to be always entangled in the meshes of the 
dialectic process of evolution. In other words, it can main- 
tain its existence independent of the body. Consciousness 
is a reality independent of matter and in no sense its product. 
It is eternal, with neither beginning nor end. Only com- 
pounds break up and are annihilated. 

We have now described briefly the five ajlva dravyas 
and the sixth jiva. Of these six all else, excepting time, are 
astikayas,5 or spatial existences, and have the possibility 
of spatial relations. Time is real, but is non-spatial. It is 
therefore a dravya, or substance possessing independent 
existence, but not an astikaya, or an extensive magnitude. 
The several dravyas can move in the same place and inter- 
penetrate without losing their essential nature. The six 
dravyas of the Jainas are different from the nine elements 
of the Vaisesika theory : earth, air, light, water, akasa or 
ether, kala or time, dik or direction, manas and souls. The 
first four are brought under matter by the Jainas. They are 
the common properties of matter corresponding to the different 
senses. On account of the transmutability and the liability 
of different particles to fuse, matter is considered a unit. 
The Vaisesikas look upon akasa as the source of sound, 
while the Jainas consider sound to be produced by the vibra- 
tions of material particles. 6 

The two jiva and ajiva are exhaustive categories of the 
universe. Of the six dravyas, jiva and pudgala form 
the chief. The others are the principle of their action or 
the results of their interaction. Sarhsara is nothing but the 

■ D s., 2. * P. 65. 

I Asti, exists; kaya, occupying space. 

11 * 


VOL. I 


J P. 64. 


« P. 20. 

‘ e. 7 . 



324 


INDIAN PHILOSOPHY 


entanglement of jiva in matter. Jiva and pudgala are 
the sakriya dravyas, or efficient causes, which move from 
place to place. Dharma and adharma condition movements, 
but are neither direct causes nor indirect conditions of change, 
and are therefore called sakriyaniskriya dravyas. The 
link of union between jiva and ajiva is karma. The pro- 
duction, fruition and destruction of karma, together with 
jiva and ajiva, are the principles or tattvas of Jainism. 1 * 
Jiva and ajiva are the main principles, which are generally 
united. The absolute liberation of jiva from ajiva is moksa. 
It is the goal of all endeavour. This ideal can be realised 
only by the stoppage and shedding of karma. Samvara is 
that which stops. By it we block the channels through 
which karma finds entrance into the soul. Nirjara is that 
which utterly and entirely wears away all sins previously 
committed. The need for these two arises on account of asrava, 
or inflow, and bandha, or bondage. Asrava is the influx 
of alien matter into the soul. Bandha is what binds the 
soul to the body. It is caused by wrong belief (mithyadar- 
sana), non-renunciation (avirati), carelessness (pramada), 
passions (kasaya), and vibrations set up in the soul through 
mind, body and speech (yoga). 3 4 Mithyatva is simply taking 
a thing for what it is not. 3 While inflow and bondage 
are the results of wrong karma, stoppage and shedding 
result from right conduct. Throughout we have the distinc- 
tion of bhava (mental) and dravya (physical) changes. 
The thoughts determine karma. 4 

The cause of the soul’s embodiment is the presence in 
it of karmic matter. It is this that spoils the natural qualities 
of the soul, knowledge and intuition. The soul is never 
completely separated from matter until its final release. 
The defilement of the soul happens thus. Subtle matter 
ready to be transformed into karma pours into the soul. 
As each particular karma is caused by some act, good, bad 


1 The seven tattvas are jiva. ajiva, asrava, bandha, samvara, nirjara 
and moksa (T.S., 4). Sometimes papa, sin, and punya, merit, are also 
'dded, when we get nine padurthas (P. 116; D.S., 28). 

» U.T.S., vii., 1. 

J Asati satbuddhi. The Advaita theory of avarana and vik^epa has 
'7me resemblance to this doctrine of the Jainas. 

4 Sec D.S., 29 fi 



PLURALISTIC REALISM OF THE JAINAS 325 


or indifferent, so it in its turn produces certain painful or 
pleasant consequences. When a particular karma produces 
its effect it is purged from the soul, and if this process of 
discharge should take place uninterruptedly, all taint of 
matter will be abolished. But, unfortunately, purging and 
binding go on together, and the soul continues to move in 
the circle of samsara. At death the soul, with its karmana- 
Sarira, goes in a few moments to the place of its new birth, 
and there assumes a fresh body, expanding or contracting 
according to the dimensions of the latter. The mundane 
souls are divided into four classes according to the place of 
their birth : (i) those born in hell, (2) those in the animal 
world, (3) those in human society, and (4) those in the divine 
kingdom. 1 


IX 

Ethics 

If deliverance is to be achieved, the lower matter is to 
be subdued by the higher spirit. When the soul is free from 
the weight which keeps it down, it rises up to the top of the 
universe where the liberated dwell. The radical conversion 
of the inner man is the way to freedom. The apparatus of 
morality is necessary to bring about the reformation of 
man’s nature and prevent the formation of new karma. 
The way to nirvana lies through the three jewels (triratna) 
of faith in Jina, knowledge of his doctrine and perfect conduct. 
“ Belief in real existence or tattvas is right faith ; knowledge 
of real nature without doubt or error is right knowledge. 
An attitude of neutrality without desire or aversion towards 
the objects of the external world is right conduct.” z The 
three together form one path, and are to be simultaneously 
pursued. Virtue consists in the fivefold conduct of one 
who has knowledge and faith. (1) Innocence, or ahimsa, 
which is not mere negative abstention, but positive kindness 
to all creation ; (2) charity and truth speaking; (3) honourable 
conduct such as not stealing ; (4) chastity in word, thought 
and deed ; and (5) renunciation of all worldly interests mark 


• P. 16. 


• P. 1 15 ; see also T.S., i. i. 



326 INDIAN PHILOSOPHY 

the good man. The last rule is sometimes interpreted in 
an extreme way that good men should go naked. It only 
signifies that so long as we are conscious of distinctions and 
open to a sense of shame, salvation is distant from us. The 
Jaina ethics lay stress on both faith and works. A distinc- 
tion is drawn between the code for laymen and that for 
ascetics. 1 All those actions which lead to peace of mind are 
punya. There are nine ways of obtaining punya or merit 
such as giving food to the deserving, water to the thirsty, 
clothes to the poor, shelter to monks, etc. Hirhsa, or 
infliction of suffering, is the great sin or papa. Other sins 
are untruthfulness, dishonesty, unchastity, covetousness. 
Anger, conceit, deceit, avarice tie us down to the world, and 
their opposites of patience, humility, simplicity and content- 
ment further the growth of the spiritual instincts. Other 
sins, such as hatred, quarrelsomeness, slander, defamation, 
abuse of others, lack of self-control, hypocrisy and false 
faith are also mentioned. Sin is no offence against God, 
but only against man. 

He prayeth well, who loveth well 
Both man and bird and beast. 

He prayeth best who loveth best 
All things both great and small. 

Coleridge. 

The ethical system of the Jainas is more rigorous than 
that of the Buddhists. It looks upon patience as the highest 
good and pleasure as a source of sin. 2 Man should attempt 
to be indifferent to pleasure and pain. True freedom consists 
in an independence of all outer things. “ That jiva, which 
through desire for outer things experiences pleasurable or 
painful states, loses his hold on self and gets bewildered, 
and led by outer things. He becomes determined by the 
other.” 3 ‘ That jiva, which being free from relations to 

others and from alien thoughts through its own intrinsic 
nature of perception and understanding perceives and knows 
its own eternal nature to be such, is said to have conduct 

* T.S., vii. 20 ff. 

1 A carfui gas iitra, S.B.E., xxii. p. 48; see also P. 76-77. 

3 P. 163. 



PLURALISTIC REALISM OF THE JAINAS 327 


that is absolutely self-determined.” 1 “ Man ! Thou art 

thine own friend ; why wishest thou for a friend beyond 
thyself ? ” 1 We do not have absolute fatalism, for though 
karma decides all, our present life, which is in our power, 
can modify the effects of the past. It is possible for us to 
evade the effects of karma by extraordinary exertions. 
Nor is there any interference by God. The austere heroes 
are blessed not because of the uncertain whims of a capricious 
God, but by the order of the universe of which they themselves 
are a part. Meditation is enjoined, since it enables us to 
acquire strength for fulfilling the vows.3 The rigorous 
character of the discipline may be inferred from the eleven 
stages of a householder’s life and the fourteen stages of 
the evolution of the soul. This grim ideal of asceticism 
has been practised in India by many great devotees who 
did themselves to death. 

The chief feature of Jainism is ahimsa, or respect for and 
abstinence from everything that has life. The scrupulous 
enforcement of this rule has led to many practices which 
come in for cheap sneering at the hands of unsympathetic 
students. Lest any life be destroyed, some Jains sweep 
the ground as they go, walk veiled for fear of inhaling a 
living organism, strain water and reject even honey. It 
is true that ahirhsa in the strict sense cannot be practised. 
The Mahabharata says : “ The world is filled with creatures 
which cannot be seen by the eye, though inferred by logic. 
When we move our eyelids, their limbs break and fall.” 4 
The Bhagavatapurana declares that “life is the life of life.” 5 
When these simple truths are forgotten, life becomes well- 
nigh impossible. A morbid fear of injuring perchance any 
life anywhere governs the conduct of the orthodox Jains. 

While Buddhism repudiates suicide. Jainism holds that 
it “ increaseth life.” If asceticism is hard to practise, if 
we cannot resist our passions and endure austerities, suicide 
is permitted. It is sometimes axgued that after twelve years 
of ascetic preparation one can kill himself, since nirvana is 
assured. As usual with the systems of the time, women 


1 p. 165. 

3 T.S., vii. 4—10. 

J i. 13. 46. JIvo jlvasya jlvanam. 


* S.B.E., xxii. p. 33. 
f Santiparva, 15. 26. 



328 INDIAN PHILOSOPHY 

are looked upon as objects of temptation. 1 In common 
with other systems of Indian thought and belief, Jainism 
believes in the possibility of non-Jainas reaching the goal if 
only they follow the ethical rules laid down. Ratnasekhara 
in the opening lines of his Sambodhasattari says : “ No matter 
whether he is a Svetambara or a Digambara, a Buddhist or 
a follower of any other creed, one who has realised the self- 
sameness of the soul, i.e. looks on all creatures as his own 
self, attains salvation.” 

The Jainas are not opposed to the caste system, which 
they try to relate to character. “ By one’s actions one 
b?comes a Brahmin, or a Ksatriya, or a Vaisya, or a 
£udra. . . . Him who is exempt from all karmas we call 
a Brahmin.” 1 " The Jains and the Buddhists use the word 

Brahmin as an honorific title, applying it even to persons 
who did not belong to the caste of Brahmins.” 3 The ex- 
clusiveness and pride born of caste are condemned by the 
Jainas. The Sutrakrtanga denounces the pride of birth 
as one of the eight kinds of pride by which man commits 
sin. 4 

The Jain sarigha, or community, is fourfold, containing 
monks and nuns, lay-brothers and lay-sisters. With the 
Buddhists the lay-members were not organically connected 
with the clergy. With a smaller constituency than that of 
Buddhism, with no missionary zeal, Jainism has survived 
in India, while Buddhism has passed away. Mrs. Stevenson 
offers an explanation for this fact. " The character of 
Jainism was such as to enable it to throw out tentacles 
to help it in its hour of need. It had never, like Buddhism, 
cut itself off from the faith that surrounded it, for it had 
always employed Brahmins as its domestic chaplains, who 
presided at its birth rites, and often acted as officiants at 
its death and marriage ceremonies and temple worship 
Then, too, amongst its chief heroes it had found niches for 
some of the favourites of the Hindu pantheon, Rama, Krsna 
and the like. Mahavlra’s genius for organisation also stood 

* S.B.E., xxii. p. 48. * S.B.E., xlv. p. 140. 

1 S.B.E., xxii. f p. xxx. 

« Yet the Jains recruit their clergy from certain families in preference 
to others. They observe caste within the community. 



PLURALISTIC REALISM OF TIIE JAINAS 329 


Jainism in good stead now, for he had made the laity an 
integral part of the community, whereas in Buddhism they 
had no part nor lot in the order. So, when storms of perse- 
cution swept over the land. Jainism simply took refuge in 
Hinduism, which opened its capacious bosom to receive it ; 
and to the conquerors it seemed an indistinguishable part 
of that great system.” 1 

The materialistic view of karma leads the Jains to attribute 
more importance than the Buddhists, to the outer act in 
contrast to the inner motive. Both Buddhism and Jainism 
admit the ideal of negation of life and personality. To both 
life is a calamity to be avoided at all costs. They require 
us to free ourselves from all the ties that bind us to nature 
and bring us sorrow. They glorify poverty and purity, 
peace and patient suffering. Hopkins caricatures the 
Jaina system when he calls it, “ a religion in which the 
chief points insisted upon are that one should deny God, 
worship man and nourish vermin.” * The remarkable 
resemblance between Jainism and Buddhism, in their ethical 
aspects, is due to the fact that they both borrow from the 
same Brahmanical sources. “ The Brahmin ascetic was the 
model from which they borrowed many important practices 
and institutions of ascetic life.” 3 ^ 


X 

Attitude to Theism 

The development of the world is rendered possible by 
the doctrine of the indefiniteness of being and interaction 
of substances. There is no god necessary for creation or 
destruction. “ There can be no destruction of things that 
do exist, nor can there be creation of things out of nothing. 
Coming into existence and ceasing to exist, things have, 
because of their attributes and modes.” 4 The substances 
by their interaction produce new sets of qualities. 1 he 
Jains repudiate the theory of the creation of the world out 

■ The Heart of Jainism, pp. 18-19. 

* The Religions of India, p. 297. 

1 S.B.E., xxii., p. xxiv. « P. 15- 



330 


INDIAN PHILOSOPHY 


of nothing or a series of accidents. The systematic working 
of the laws of nature cannot be a product of luck or accident. 
There is no need to assume with the theologian any first 
cause of the universe. We cannot conceive how a non- 
creative God suddenly becomes creative. On such a hypo- 
thesis the question of the material out of which the world 
is created is difficult to answer. Did it or did it not exist 
in some form prior to the making of the world ? If it is 
said that it all depends on the inscrutable will of God, we 
should put an end to all science and philosophy. If things 
can function only in obedience to the will of God, there is 
no reason why they should be endowed with distinct attri- 
butes. Different substances need not have specific functions 
which cannot be exchanged. Water can burn and fire cool 
if that be the will of God. As a matter of fact, however, 
we find that different substances have their own specific 
functions belonging to their own nature, and the substances 
themselves would be destroyed if their functions were 
annihilated. If it is argued that everything that exists must 
have a maker, then that maker himself would stand in need 
of another maker, and we should be landed in an infinite 
regress. The way of escape from this circle is to assume the 
reality of a self-subsisting maker, who is the author of every- 
thing else. The Jaina thinker asks, If it be possible for 
one being to be self-subsistent and eternal, is it not possible 
for more things and beings to be uncreated and substantive ? 
He puts forth the hypothesis of a number of substances, and 
the world is explained on the theory of the necessity of the 
substances to manifest themselves. The whole universe of 
being consisting of mental and material factors has existed 
from all eternity, undergoing an infinite number of revolu- 
tions produced by the powers of nature without the inter- 
vention of any eternal deity. The diversities of the world 
are traced to the five co-operating conditions of time (kala), 
nature (svabhava), necessity (niyati), activity (karma), and 
desire to be and act (udyama). The seed may be instinct 
with powers, but before it grows into a tree it must have 
the help of the time or season, natural environment and the 
act of its being placed in the soil. Its own nature determines 
the kind of tree into which it grows. 



PLURALISTIC REALISM OF THE JAINAS 331 

Though there is no such being distinct from the world 
called God, yet certain of the elements of the world when 
properly developed obtain deification. These are the arhats, 
the supreme lords, the omniscient souls who have overcome 
all faults. Though there is no divine creative spirit, still 
every soul when it reaches its highest perfection becomes 
a Paramatman or supreme soul . 1 God is only the highest, 
noblest and fullest manifestation of the powers which lie 
latent in the soul of man. All perfect men are divine, and 
there is no rank among them, since all are equal. 

Strictly speaking, there is no room for devotion or bhakti 
in the Jaina system. All attachment according to it should 
cease. Personal love is to be burnt up in the glow of asceticism. 
But weak man is obliged to develop a sort of devotion towards 
the great tirthankaras, however much strict logic may 
prohibit it. The lay members demanded a creed and a cult 
suited to their moral and religious condition. When Jainism 
began to spread beyond the place of its origin, the necessity 
to satisfy the religious aspirations of the normal man became 
urgent. Otherwise, worshippers of other gods could not be 
converted into Jainism. When followers of the Krsna cult 
came into the fold of Jainism, a relationship was established 
between the 22nd Tirthaiikara (Aristanemi) and Krsna. 
Many Hindu gods crept in, so that to-day we find divisions 
of Jainas into the Vaisnavas and the non-Vaisnavas. 

The life of a god in heaven is one of the forms that a 
soul might assume by the acumulation of merit. When the 
merit is exhausted, that life passes away. Gods are only 
embodied souls like men and animals, different from them 
in degree, but not in kind. The greater power and perfec- 
tion belonging to the divine body and organism are the 
rewards of the good deeds of a former life. The liberated 
souls are above the gods. They are never born again. They 
have no longer any connexion with the world and exert 
no influence on it. They do not look to the steep ascent 
leading to the goal or offer a helping hand to those struggling 
on the upward path. When prayers are addressed to the 
famous Jinas who have reached perfection and passed out 

1 Compare Professor Alexander’s theory of angels. Space, Time and 
Deity, vol. ii. pp. 346, 365. 



332 


INDIAN PHILOSOPHY 


of the world of change and woe, they cannot and do not 
return answers to the prayers, since they are utterly in- 
different to all that happens in the world and are entirely 
free from all emotion. But there are the gods who watch and 
control true discipline. 1 They hear the prayers and bestow 
favours. So far as the Jinas are concerned, the best mode 
of worshipping them is to adopt their advice. Realisation 
of one’s true self and not devotion to Tlrthaiikaras is the 
way to freedom. 3 Meditation or adoration of the Jina 
sanctifies the soul. Since the severely simple religion of 
the Jainas did not admit grace or forgiveness, it could not 
appeal to the masses, and so halting compromises were made. 


XI 


Nirvana 

Nirvana or deliverance is not annihilation of the soul, 
but its entry into a blessedness that has no end. It is an 
escape from the body, though not from existence. We 
have already said that the liberated being by avoiding all 
emotions becomes characterless, with no interest in the lives 
of its fellows or inclination to help them. “ The liberated 
is not long nor small . . . nor black, nor blue, nor bitter, 
nor pungent : neither cold nor hot. . . . Without body, without 
rebirth ... he perceives, he knows, but there is no analogy, 
(whereby we can know the nature of the liberated soul) ; 
its essence is without form ; there is no condition of the 
unconditioned.” 3 The siddha state is not the cause or the 
effect of the samsara series. It is absolutely unconditioned. 4 
Causality has no hold on the redeemed soul. “ Know that 
from the ordinary point of view, perfect faith, knowledge and 
conduct are the causes of liberation, while in reality one’s 
own soul consisting of these three (is the cause of liberation). ”5 
We cannot say anything positive about the freed soul, nor 
can we strictly speaking know that there is a plurality of 
liberated souls. The state of perfection is passively described 

1 isasanadhisthaya devatati. » P. 176 2 . 

J S.B.E., xxii. p. 52. * F. 36. 

I D.S., 39 ; see also 40. 



PLURALISTIC REALISM OF THE JAINAS 333 


as freedom from action and desire, a state of utter and abso- 
lute quiescence, a rest that knows no change or ending, a 
passionless and ineffable peace. The energy of past karma 
is extinguished, and the spirit, though still existent, has no 
chance of re-embodiment. Though not quite consistently, 
positive descriptions are given of the freed soul as that it 
has infinite consciousness, pure understanding, absolute 
freedom and eternal bliss. 1 It can perceive and know, since 
perception and knowledge are functions of the soul and not 
of the sense organs. The freed soul has a beginning but no 
end, while a bound soul has no beginning but has an end. 
These freed souls enjoy a kind of interpenetrating existence 
on account of their oneness of status. Their soul substance 
has a special power by which an infinity of souls could 
exist without mutual exclusion. The identity of the 
saved is determined by the living rhythm retaining the 
form of the last physical life and by the knowledge of 
the past. This ideal of freedom is manifested in the 
most perfect degree in the lives of the twenty-four Jain 
tirthaiikaras. 

The loka, or the universe, is held in the middle of the 
aloka, in the form of the trunk of the man, with siddha£ila 
at the top, the place where the head should be. This 
siddhasila is the abode of the omniscient souls, and may be 
called the spiritual eye of the universe. So moksa is said 
to be eternal upward movement. 2 * On liberation the soul 
goes upward, because of the momentum due to its previous 
activity, 3 the non-existence of the relation to the elements 
which kept it down, 4 breaking of the bondage, 5 and its 
natural tendency to go upwards. 6 

i p 2 8. » Nityordhvagamanam mnkti. 

3 Purvaprayogat. 4 * Asangatvat. 

5 Bandhacchedat. 

^ Tathagatiparinamat. See U.T.S., x. 8. The siddha souls are ol 
five kinds: (i) 'I he tirthahkaras, or the liberated who preached Jainism 
in the embodied condition ; (2) the arhats, or the perfect souls who 

await the attainment of nirvana after shedding the karmanasarira , 

(3) the acaryas, or heads of ascetic groups; (4) the upadh)a>a-, or 
teaching saints ; and (5) sadlius, a class which includes the rest {D.S., 
50 - 54 )* 



334 


INDIAN PHILOSOPHY 


XII 

Conclusion 

Jainism offers us an empirical classification of things 
in the universe, and so argues for a plurality of spirits. In 
logic, as we have seen, it takes its stand on the relativity of 
knowledge, the obvious fact that the relations of objects 
within the world are not fixed or independent, but are the 
results of interpretation. Moreover, the theory that reality 
and meaning are inseparable makes for monism in meta- 
physics and not pluralism. As a matter of fact, the plural- 
istic universe in Jainism is only a relative point of view, and 
not an ultimate truth. 

Jainism looks upon the universe as filled with jlvas, 
even as Leibniz thought that the world was filled with 
monads. “ In the smallest particle of matter there is a 
world of living creatures, entelechies or souls. Each portion 
of matter may be conceived as like a garden full of plants, 
or like a pond full of fishes. But each branch of every plant, 
each member of any animal, each drop of its liquid parts, 
is also some such garden or pond. And though the earth 
and the air which are between the plants of the garden, or 
the water which is between the fish of the pond, be neither 
plant nor fish, yet they also contain plants and fishes, but 
mostly so minute as to be imperceptible to us. Thus there 
is nothing fallow, nothing sterile, nothing dead in the universe, 
no chaos, no confusion save in appearance, somewhat as it 
might appear to be in a pond at a distance, in which one 
would see a confused movement and, as it were, a swarming 
of fish in the pond without separately distinguishing the 
fish themselves.” We shall see that the metaphysical 
scheme of the Jainas has affinities with Leibniz’s monadism 
and Bergson’s creative evolutionism . 1 

A jiva is whatever is living, whatever is not mechanical. 
It answers to the life element of Bergson. It is also a subject 
of experience, and corresponds to the monad of Leibniz. 

1 Though in its origin the Jaina view might have been a rather crude 
form oi physical science, later Jama thinkers developed definite philosophical 
grounds capable of being clearly stated and defended. 



PLURALISTIC REALISM OF THE JAINAS 335 


It is anything for which the mechanical explanation is 
inadequate. Since Jainism is the product of an age of 
immature philosophising, we find that it is not clearly aware 
of the exact distinctions between jiva and Atman, ajlva 
and matter. A jiva is a particular kind of existent thing. 
The liberated jiva freed from matter is called the Atman. 
The Atman is pure consciousness untainted by matter. It 
excludes all space and externality. It is the jiva purified 
and raised to its highest spiritual status, which is mere 
formless consciousness. Pudgala is not pure matter untouched 
by consciousness. It already bears the impress of spirit. 
Atman is spirit or being, and matter is the negative principle 
of non-being. The latter corresponds to the space of Bergson 
or the materia prima of Leibniz. The bare materiality of 
pudgala is the direct opposite of spirit. It is mere difference, 
and therefore according to Jaina logic unreal. A jiva is 
a combination of the two. It is material — spiritual . 1 It 
is the soul loaded with matter, involved in bondage. All 
jlvas in samsara are associated with this negative material 
element. Jainism believes that these three, Atman or the 
pure spirit, pure matter, and jiva, which is a combination of 
the two, are existent, though the first two are imperceptible 
to us. The pudgala skandha, which we see, has also an 
element of consciousness, and is as much a jiva as anything 
else so far as its essence is concerned. The jiva and the 
ajiva of the Jainas are not the empirical abstractions of 
Atman or consciousness and matter or non-consciousness, but 
the products of an interaction between the two. The pudgala 
bears on it the impress of self, and the jiva is already pene- 
trated by matter. It is an inaccurate usage that makes us 
confuse ]iva and ajiva with being and non-being. Strictly 
speaking, Atman and non-Atman are the primary elements, 
the two irreconcilable and antagonistic principles. Jiva 
possesses more of self, ajiva more of not-self. They repre- 
sent two orders of arrangement in the whole. 

To the empirical vision the jivas constitute the universe, 
and every jiva is a concrete unity, a compound substance. 
It is a one in many, or a many in one. The relation between 
the two is beginningless In the world of samsara the two 
■ See Outlines oj Jainism, p. 77. 



336 INDIAN PHILOSOPHY 

are never separated. The goal of all jlvas towards which 
they ought to strive is the shedding off of all matter. All 
centres of living activity are jlvas. 

In the universe, we are told, the two Atman and matter, 
subject and object, are always found together. Throughout 
experience we have the strife between the two, where the 
one tries to dominate the other. It is interesting to know 
that the spiritual element of the jiva is said to possess an 
upward tendency, while the material element has a downward 
tendency. A jiva inhabiting the body of a human being 
may become so weighted with matter that it passes into 
an earthly life. 

We have gradations of jivas according as they exhibit 
more or less of the dominance of self over not-self. In 
the highest stages of divine existence, the level of gods to 
be distinguished from that of pure souls or siddhatmans, 
who have no taint of matter, we have the largest amount of 
the domination of self and the not-self is at its lowest 
conceivable point. In the lowest stages we have the pure 
externality of things to things where the not-self is at its 
highest. As we rise to plants and animals, we have more 
of self and less of not-self. They have a unity and a sim- 
plicity which constitute their individuality. They carry their 
past in their present activity. When we attain to the 
status of gods, the not-self is at its lowest point. The joy 
of life rises to the god-rhythm of the universe. In things 
between the metals and the gods, self and not-self are at 
strife. In pure soul and in bare matter we have exclusively 
the spiritual and the non-spiritual ; only they are not the 
reals of experience. 

Can we say that the plurality of jivas on this hypothesis 
is the ultimate truth of metaphysics ? We are told that 
in jivas thcis are two separate tendencies at work. The 
world open to us has this duality of self and not-self, sat 
and asat. The sat is real, the soul with its omniscience ; 
the asat is the element which obscures this fact of omniscience 
and makes the jiva a limited one In its innate nature, in 
its omniscient overflow, the soul is said to fill the whole 
universe, but the jiva becomes reduced to a single point 
in which the universe is reflected as into a centre. It is 



PLURALISTIC REALISM OF THE JAINAS 337 


asat that is the basis of individuality. It is the negative 
principle that makes the jiva a separate centre of interests, 
a limited expression of the omniscient soul, an existence 
in the psychological order. The bodj constitutes the 
degree of imperfection and gives a standpoint to the soul. 
The different kinds of jivas, metals, plants, animals, men 
and gods, are distinct, because their bodies are distinct. 
It follows that, though the soul which dwells in them all 
is the same, the negative principle of matter creates the 
empirical distinctness of individuals. “ The separateness 
and individuality of a jiva is only from the point of view of 
vyavahara, or experience. Truly speaking, the essence of 
all jivas is consciousness-*” 1 Plurality of souls is a relative 
conception which reality presents when we lay stress on 
sensation, feeling and bondage, as if they were the only true 
moments of the real. We were obliged to transcend the 
conception of an empirical centre and rise to a logical subject 
in the Jaina theory of knowledge. The subject is such a 
persistent fact that the whole world is only for it . 3 When 
reflection by imperfect abstraction reduces the subject to 
a finite mind conditioned by an organism, with a particular 
location in space and time, we get the idea of the independence 
of the jivas. In other words, to use Sarhkara’s famous 
expressions, we have the doctrine of the plurality of jivas 
only so long as we treat the subject as an object which can 
be scrutinised. If we follow the implications of thought 
and disentangle the subject from embodiment in sensation 
and feeling, free it from all contact with the object, we shall 
see that there is only one subject in reality. Jainism did 
not choose to realise this height or look towards this ideal, 
and it is true that this exercise of thought is difficult at 
our level. For human thought a barrier is fixed between 
the ideal and the actual. We are compelled by our finite- 
ness to start with particulars from which we cannot shake 
ourselves free. 

1 D.S., 3. 7 and 8. 

1 Compare Bosanquet : “ It is freely admitted that in cognition the 
self is universal. It goes out into a world which is beyond its ora given 
being, and what it meets there it holds in common with other selves, and 
in holding it ceases to be a self-contained and repellent unit.” ( Gifjord 
Lectures, Second Series, chap, ii.) 



338 INDIAN PHILOSOPHY 

Jainism even considers the theory of the oneness of the 
absolute and argues against it. “ If there were but one 
soul common to all beings, they could not be known from 
one another nor could they experience different lots ; there 
would not be Brahmins, Ksatriyas, Vaisyas and Sud as, 
insects, birds and snakes ; all would b men and gods. 
We make equal both those who lead a blameable life and 
those who in this world practise right conduct.” 1 There 
is no need to deny the plurality at the psychological or the 
empirical level, where only the question of the enjoyment 
of the fruits of karma arises. Where the mind is bound by 
organic conditions the doctrine of plurality has meaning, but 
our question is, can we consider this limited jiva to be the 
ultimate truth ? If this limitation be an essential condition 
of the soul which it can never shake off, then the plurality 
of jivas is real, but the Jainas believe that the limitations 
are accidental in the sense that they do not pertain to the 
essence of the soul, and in the state of freedom the soul is 
utterly freed from them. In that case we shall be illogical 
if we consider the accidental plurality of souls to be the final 
expression of truth. It is an accepted canon of metaphysical 
criticism that what is not at he beginning or end cannot be 
said to be really in its present process . 2 Plurality may be 
actual or existent, but it is not real. 

It is not possible for us to support the doctrine of the 
plurality of souls when we have no means of finding out 
whether in the ultimate condition there is any basis of dis- 
tincti< n. Salvation is inconsistent with a separate person- 
ality that is throughout hampered by what is external and 
contingent and is bound up with the bodily organism and 
nature itself. The particularity of self opens the way to error 
and sin, and salvation means the abolition of this particularity. 

Metaphysically, the question of monism or dualism 
is determined by the relation of the two tendencies at 
work in the world. The Jainas do not take up the question 
of origins. We have no attempt at deducing the categories 
or supplying a rigid proof of their ultimateness. They 
repudiate the theory of an extra-cosmic deity conceived 

> Sutrakrtariga, ii. 7. 4S and 51 ; sec also i. 1. 1. 

* Adav aute ca yan nasti vartamane pi tat t.itha. 



PLURALISTIC REALISM OF THE JAINAS 339 


of as a whimsical despot. We do not misrepresent 
the Jaina theory if we say that it looks upon God, nature 
and soul as aspects of the same. There is no God except 
the soul in its ideal integrity. To conceive of God in 
any other way is to make him finite. The mind of man 
excludes itself from others and is of a limited nature, but 
if we get a mind which is not restricted by limitations, 
but can present itself to itself in its completeness, then the 
limitations that characterise human experience pass away. 
The eternal consciousness is within the human experience. 
It is the power that directs us to get beyond all finite forms. 
In knowledge with the unity of content it establishes for all 
minds, we are lifted above the psychological self, which is 
exclusive of others. From the mind conditioned by space 
and time we reach a mind through which alone space and 
time relations arise. The infinite is inherent in the finite. 
That is why the finite is ever struggling to break down its 
finiteness and reach out to the fullest freedom, and when 
the freedom of spirit is reached all is overcome. There 
cannot be any system of jivas apart from such a spirit. 

What is the relation between the spiritual and the material 
tendencies which are struggling in the world of experience ? 
Are they differences within a whole ? They seem to be well 
adapted to each other and to promote the progress of the 
whole. While they are opposed to each other, they do not 
seem to be opposed to the unity which is a synthesis of 
opposites. By emphasising such facts the Jaina theory 
would be led to the hypothesis of a concrete universal, a 
reality at once divided and united. To such a view there 
would be nothing purely spiritual or purely material. Both 
these are abstractions of logic. The real is a concrete whole 
of which pure being and pure matter are abstractions. They 
are moments of the one universal, antagonistic, but insepar- 
able elements of one whole. The universal is manifesting 
itself in the life of the world. The struggle of opposites is 
present in all degrees of reality, though their opposition is 
overcome in the harmony of the absolute. If Jaina logic 
looks upon thought as the ultimate category and regards 
the central nature of reality as what is revealed by thought, 
then a concrete monism will be the result A pure spirit, 



340 INDIAN PHILOSOPHY 

an abstract absolute, with nothing to struggle against, 
an actionlcss spiritual energy, a motionless being is mere 
nothing. Yet inconsistently Jainism asserts a condition of 
soul completely severed from matter, an upward movement 
without the potentiality of the downward in it. Kumarila 
urges that the reality of siddhatmans cannot be estab- 
lished by logical proof. “ No omniscient being is perceived 
by us here. Nor can his reality be established by inference .” 1 
The Jainas take their stand on the innate nature of the 
soul, which can be manifested when the hindrances are 
removed. Even Kumarila agrees that the soul has a natural 
capacity for grasping all things, and there are w’ays and 
means by which we can develop this capacity. If we em- 
phasise this aspect of Jaina philosophy and remember that 
there is intuitional knowledge of the kevalin, which is higher 
than thought, we are led to a monism absolute and unlimited, 
which would require us to look upon the striving world, where 
all things roam about midway between reality and nothing- 
ness, as unreal. We can look upon the world as real only 
when we shut out of view the highest aspect of pure spirit. 
If we recognise it, then the not-self is merely the other of 
self, some reflection thereof not quite as real as the self, 
something which is ultimately to be sublated. The world 
becomes then an appearance created by the force of the 
not-self. In this way we are led to a severe monism of 
the type advanced by £amkara. One thing, however, is 
clear, that it is only by stopping short at a half-way house 
that Jainism is able to set forth a pluralistic realism. 

REFERENCES 

S.B.E., vols. xxii and xlv. 

Jacobi : Articles on Jainism and the Jaina Atomic Theory in 
E.R.E., vol. vii. 

Umasvati : Tattvartha Sutra. (Sacred Books of the Jains.) 

Nemicandra : Dravyasaiiigraha. (Sacred Books of the Jams.) 

Kundaicundacarya : Pancastikayasamayasara. (Sacred Books 
of the Jains.) 

Jaini : Outlines of Jainism. 

Mrs. Stevenson : The Heart of Jainism. 

Barodia : History and Literature of Jainism. 

S.D.S., chap. ni. 


■ S D S. pp 41-42. 



CHAPTER VII 


THE ETHICAL IDEALISM OF EARLY 
BUDDHISM 

Introduction — The evolution of Buddhist thought — Literature of early 
Buddhism — The three Pitakas — Questions of King Milinda— Visud- 
dhimagga — Life and personality of Buddha — Conditions of the time — 
The world of thought — The futility of metaphysics — The state of 
religion — Moral life — Ethics independent of metaphysics and theology 
— The positivist method of Buddha — His rationalism — Religion 
within the bounds of reason — Buddhism and the Upanisads — The 
four truths — The first truth of suffering — Is Buddhism pessimistic ? — 
The second truth of the causes of suffering — Impermanence of things 
Ignorance — The dynamic conception of reality — Bergson — Identity 
of objects and continuity of process — Causation — Impermanence and 
momentariness — The world order — Being and becoming in the Upani- 
sads and early Buddhism — Aristotle, Kant and Bergson— Sariikara 
on the ksanikavada — The nature of becoming — Is it objective or 
only subjective ? — External reality — Body and mind — The empirical 
individual — Nairatmyavada — Nature of the Atman — Nagasena s 
theory of the soul — Its resemblance to Hume’s — The nature of the 
subject— § amkara and Kant — Buddhist psychology — Its relation to 
modern psychology — Sense perception — Affection, will and know- 
ledge — -Association — Duration of mental states — Subconsciousness 
Rebirth — Pratltyasamutpada — Nidanas — Avidya and the other links 
in the chain — The place of avidya in Buddha’s metaphysics The 
ethics of Buddhism — -Its psychological basis — Analysis of the act 
Good and evil— The middle path — The eightfold way— Buddhist 
Dhyana and the Yoga philosophy — The ten fetters — The Arhat 
Virtues and vices — The motive of moral life — The inwardness of 
Buddhist morality — The charge of intellectualism The complaint 
of asceticism — The order of mendicants — Sangha Buddha s attitude 
to caste and social reform — The authority of the Vedas The ethical 
significance of Karma — Karma and freedom Rebirth Its mechanism 
— Nirvana— Its nature and varieties — The Nirvana of Buddhism and 
the Moksa of the Upanisads— God in early Buddhism— The criticism 
of the traditional proofs for the existence of God — The absolutist 
implications of Buddhist metaphysics— The deification of Buddha— 
Compromises with popular religion— Buddhist theory of knowledge— 
Buddha's pragmatic agnosticism — Buddha s silence on metaphysical 
problems— Kant and Buddha— The inevitability of metaphysics— 
The unity of thought between Buddhism and the Upanisads— 
Buddhism and the Samkhya theory — Success of Buddhism. 

341 



342 


INDIAN PHILOSOPHY 


I 

Early Buddhism 

There is no question that the system of early Buddhism 
is one of the mos* original which the history of philosophy 
presents. In its fundamental ideas and essential spirit it 
approximates remarkably to the advanced scientific thought 
of the nineteenth century. The modern pessimistic philo- 
sophy of Germany, that of Schopenhauer and Hartmann, is 
only a revised version of ancient Buddhism. It is some- 
times said to be “ little more than Buddhism vulgarised.” 
As far as the dynamic conception of reality is concerned, 
Buddhism is a splendid prophecy of the creative evolu- 
tionism of Bergson. Early Buddhism suggests the outline 
of a philosophy suited to the practical wants of the present 
day and helpful in reconciling the conflict between faith and 
science. This will be clearly seen if we confine our atten- 
tion to the leading principles of early Buddhism and do 
not emphasise the varying phases of its growth and the 
mythical legends which have crystailised round the primi- 
tive teaching and the founder, Buddha himself. 


II 

Evolution of Buddhist Thought 

Buddhist thought even in India has an evolution of 
over a thousand years to show. As Rhys Davids observes : 
“ Buddhism varies, through slight degrees, as the centuries 
pass by in almost every book.” In the second century 
after Buddha’s death, no less than eighteen varieties of 
Buddhistic doctrine can be traced . 1 In the realm of ideas, 
life means change. It is not possible for us to thrust the 
whole development into this era. While early Buddhism 
and the Hlnayana and the Mahayana forms of it belong to 
this period, the four schools of Buddhistic thought take 


1 Rhys Davids : J.P.A.S., 1S91, "The Sects of the Buddhists." 



ETHICAL IDEALISM OF BUDDHISM 343 


us beyond it. We propose, however, to refer to the 
Buddhistic schools in treating of this period, since towards 
the end of it they were fairly well developed. 


Ill 

Literature 

For an account of early Buddhism we have to depend 
on the Pitakas, or the Baskets of the Law. The views set 
forth in them, if not the actual doctrine taught by Buddha 
himself, are yet the nearest approximation to it we possess. 
They represent what early Indian Buddhists believed to 
be the sayings and doings of their . master. We have in 
them an account of the beliefs about Buddha and his 
teaching prevalent at the time when the pitakas were 
compiled and written down. They were probably compiled 
and completed before 241 b.c., when the third Council was 
held. They are undoubtedly the earliest and most authori- 
tative account of Buddha’s teaching now in existence. 

According to the late traditions of Buddhism, a short 
time after Gautama’s death, or after “the lamp of wisdom 
had been blown out by the wind of impermanence,” disputes 
arose among the followers of Buddha about certain matters 
of doctrine. To settle them a council was called together 
at Rajagrha, near Magadha. When the whole order was 
assembled, Kdsyapa, the most learned of Buddha’s dis- 
ciples, was asked to recite the metaphysical views set 
forth in the Abhidhammapitaka. Updli, the oldest disciple 
of Buddha then living, was called upon to repeat the laws 
and rules of discipline which are found in the Vinayapitaka. 
Lastly, Ananda, Buddha’s favourite disciple, was asked to 
repeat the Suttapitaka, containing the stories and parables 
told by Buddha during his preaching tour. For a long 
time the teaching of Buddha was transmitted through the 
regular succession of teachers and disciples, and was reduced 
to writing only in 80 B.C., in the reign of King V attagamani. 
in Ceylon. “ The text of the three pitakas and the com- 
mentary thereon did the most wise bhiksus hand down 
in former times orally, but since they saw that the people 



344 INDIAN PHILOSOPHY 

were falling away (from the orthodox teaching) the bhikshus 
met together, and in order that the true doctrines might 
endure, they wrote them down in books.” 1 The Pali canon 
has the three divisions of (i) Sutta or tales, (2) Vinaya or 
discipline, (3) Abhidhamma or doctrine. The first Sutta 
pitaka has five divisions, called Nikayas. The first four of 
these consists of Suttas or lectures mainly by Buddha in the 
form of speeches or dialogues. There is no difference in the 
doctrines they inculcate. 2 About this basket of discourses 
or Sutta pitaka as a whole, Rhys Davids says : “In depth of 
philosophic insight, in the method of Socratic questioning 
often adopted, in the earnest and elevated tone of the whole, 
in the evidence they afford of the most cultured thought of 
the day, these discourses constantly remind the reader of the 
dialogues of Plato. ... It is quite inevitable that as soon 

1 Mahavamsa, chap, xxxiil. 

* The five divisions are the following : — 

(a) Dfgha Nikaya is the collection of long lectures containing thirty-four 
suttas, each dealing with one or more points of Buddhistic doctrine. The 
first of them is Brahmajdla sutta, the second Sdmahhaphala sutta (on the 
reward of asceticism). Ambatfha sutta speaks of Buddha’s attitude to caste. 
Kutadanta sutta speaks of the relation of Brahmanism and Buddhism. 
Tevijja sutta contrasts the Brahmin culture with Buddhist ideals. Mahani- 
ddna sutta speaks of causation. Sigalovdda sutta speaks of the duties of 
the Buddhist layman. Mahdparimbbdna sutta gives an account of the 
last days of Buddha. 

( b ) The Majjhima Nikaya is the collection of lectures of middle length, 
about 152 sermons and dialogues dealing with all points of Buddhist religion. 

( c ) Samyutta Nikaya is the collection of combined lectures. It contains 
the famous Dhammachakkapavattana sutta, “ lecture on setting in motion 
the wheel of the law.” It is usually called the sermon of Benares, and is 
also found in the Vinayapifaka. 

(d) Anguttara Nikaya has over 2,300 suttas in eleven sections, so arranged 
that in the first are treated objects of one kind, in the second those of which 
there are two kinds, and so on 

(e) Khuddaka Nikaya is the collection of small pieces. It has fifteen 
divisions: (1) Khuddakapatha, (2) Dhammapada, (3) Udana, (4) IUvutiaha, 
(5) Suttanipata, (G) Vimanavatthu, (7) Petavatthu, (8) Theragathd, (9) Therl- 
gdthd, (10) Jdtaka, (11) Niddesa, (12) Patisambhiddmagga, (13) Apaddna, (14) 
Buddhavamsa, (15) Cariyd pitaka. The Theragatha and Therlgatha are of 
great poetic merit and human interest. Their songs of deliverance and 
joy are ascribed to members of the Sangha who have attained to arhatid, 
the perfect peace and delight beyond words, in the lifetime of Gautama. 
The J atakas relate the legendary histories of the previous births of Gautama, 
and are very valuable to the student of folklore. Dhammapada (S.B.E., 
vol. x) contains the gist of the essential principles of Buddha’s doctrine. 
Those who have not the patience and the ability to master the three pifakas 
resort to this summary of Buddhist ethics. 



ETHICAL IDEALISM OF BUDDHISM 345 

as it is properly translated and understood, this collection 
of the dialogues of Gautama will come to be placed, in 
our schools of philosophy and history, on a level with the 
dialogues of Plato.” 

The Vmayapitaka, which deals with ecclesiastical dis- 
cipline and prescribes rules and regulations to govern the 
lives of the monks, has three main divisions, two of which 
are subdivided : (i) Suttavibhanga, divided into (a) Parajika, 
(b) Pacittiya. (2) Khandaka divided into ( a ) Mahavagga, 
(b) Cullavagga. (3) Parivara, The third Abhidhammapitaka ' 
deals with psychological ethics and, incidentally, metaphysics 
and philosophy, and has seven sub-divisions : (1) Dhamma 
Sangani, ascribed to the first half or the middle of the 
fourth century b.c. ; (2) Vibhanga ; (3) Kathavattu ; 

(4) Puggalapannatti ; (5) Dhatu ; (6) Yamaka; and (7) Pat. 
thana. This is the Pali canon, setting forth the doctrines 
known as the Theravada, since they were collected at the 
first Council by the Theras or the Elders. 2 

Sometimes Milinda Panha, or Questions of King Milinda, l 
a dialogue between the Buddhist teacher and acute dialec- 
tician Nagasena and the Greek king Menander, who ruled 
over the Indus territory and the valley of the Ganges from 
about 125 to 95 B.C., is also included in the Pali canon, as in 
Siam. This work is in great use in Ceylon, where it is the 
standard authority. It was written sometime about or after 
the beginning of the Christian era. We need not consider 
this book to be the epitome of the teaching of Buddha. The 
discussion seems to have taken place some 400 years after 
Buddha’s death, and represents to us a form of Buddhism 
which came into vogue much later than the age of Buddha. 
The Questions of King Milinda, according to Rhys Davids, 
is “ the masterpiece of Indian prose, and indeed the best 
book of its class, from a literary point of view, that had 
been produced in any country.” Buddhaghosa considers 
it to be the most authoritative work after the Pali pitakas.t 
While the Pali pi takas may be substantially identical with 
the teaching of Buddha, in the Questions of Milinda we 

■ Abhidhamma is ge-erally translated " metaphysics ” ; Doctrine brings 
out the Pali sense better. * See Oidenberg : Dipavatiisa, p. 37. 

i S.B.E., vols. ixxv. and xxxvi. 4 S.B.E., xxxv., p. xvi. 



346 INDIAN PHILOSOPHY 

seem to get a more negative interpretation of the Buddhist 
teaching. Nagasena seems to commit Buddha to a negative 
dogmatism which denies soul, God and a future for the 
liberated. He is a thoroughgoing rationalist, who adopted 
the scientific method rigorously and tore off the screen 
of make-believe which pious hands had woven round the 
image of truth to disguise its uglier aspects. Realising 
that the seeker of truth must at least be truthful, he held 
that the make-believe of religion was no escape for the 
sufferings of mankind. On obviously incomplete data 
Buddha might have withheld judgment. Nagasena doubted 
the caution of Buddha and became actively negative. To 
him lack of evidence for an opinion was a sufficient reason 
for disbelieving it. For believing on incomplete evidence 
is not only a blunder but a crime. Suspended judgment 
was Buddha’s attitude ; reckless repudiation was Nagasena’s 
amendment. In working out with remorseless logic the 
consequences of Buddha’s ideas, he has unwittingly revealed 
their inadequacy. 

Buddhaghosa’s Visuddhimagga is a later work (a.d. 400) 
composed by a Brahmin convert to Buddhism. It 
sets forth the Hinayana arhat ideal and develops the 
old doctrine. Buddhaghosa is the first Buddhist com- 
mentator. His AtthasalinI is a valuable commentary on 
Dhammasangani. The Theravada did not develop much after 
Buddhaghosa’s time. Other Pali works of great historical, 
though not of philosophical, importance are the Dipavamsa 
(fourth century A.D.) and the Mahavamsa (fifth century A.D.). 
Our account of early Buddhism in this chapter will be con- 
fined mainly to the pitakas and the orthodox com- 
mentaries. The Questions of King Milinda will also be 
used, but with reservation. Even when later works are 
made use of, we shall take care that no idea is introduced 
which is not contained in the earlier texts. 

IV 

Buddha's Life and Personality 

When we pass from the Upanisads to early Buddhism, 
we pass from a work of many minds to the considered 



ETHICAL IDEALISM OF BUDDHISM 017 


creed of a single individual. In the Upanisads we have 
an amazing study of an atmosphere, in Buddhism the con- 
crete embodiment of thought in the life of a man. This 
unity of thought and life worked wonderfully on the world 
of the time. The singular personality and life of Buddha 
had much to do with the success of early Buddhism. 

Any man with imagination will be struck with amaze- 
ment when he finds that six centuries before Christ there 
lived in India a prince second to none before him or after 
in spiritual detachment, lofty idealism, nobility of life and 
love for humanity. The name of “ Buddha,” the knower, 
the enlightened, is that by which Gautama, the wandering 
preacher, is known to his disciples and through them to 
the world. 1 He was born circa 567 b.c. His own name 
is Siddhartha, or he who has accomplished his aim ; his 
family name Gautama, his father’s name ^uddhodana, and 
mother’s Maya. He was the heir to the Sakya kingdom, 
and was brought up in Kapilavastu, the capital of the 
fsakyas, by the second wife of Suddhodana, Mahayapati, 
Gautama’s mother having died seven days after his birth. 
It is said that he married his cousin Yasodhara, and had 
a son, by name Rahula, who became later his disciple. 
Early enough the burden and mystery of this unintelligible 
world pressed upon him with great force. He was much 
disturbed by the transience and uncertainty of life, and 
became keenly conscious of the black depths in which 
multitudes of human beings perish in darkness and sin. 
The story of the four signs which Gautama met on the 
road of Kapilavastu, the aged man bowed down by years, 
the sick man scorched by fever, the corpse followed by 
mourners weeping and tearing their hair and the mendicant 
friar, points the moral that the misery of the world left a 
sting on his sensitive nature.* The sights of suffering were 

1 Buddha means the enlightener, and is a common name applied to many 
in India. It is a term like Ch ist which means the anointed. 

a The force of fatality in a similar manner stirred George Sand to reflect 
on the sorrow' of the world. " When the sadness, the want, the hopelessness, 
the vice of which haman society is full, rose up before me, when my reflections 
were no longer bent upon my proper destiny, but upon that of the world of 
which I was but an atom, my personal despair extended itself to all creation, 
and the law of fatality arose before me in such appalling aspect that my 

12 


VOL. I 



348 


INDIAN PHILOSOPHY 


enough to awaken in him a consciousness of the age-long 
burden that bears hardest on the innocent and threatens 
with shipwreck even the best endeavours of man. Indi- 
vidual instances of suffering to Buddha were illustrations of 
a universal problem. All that was fixed in him was shaken 
and he trembled at life. 

Impressed by the emptiness of the things of sense, he 
renounced the ease, power and wealth of the palace to 
meditate on the eternal, and open for his fellowmen an 
escape from the meanness of life and the illusions of the 
flesh. In those days seekers after truth, haunted and 
obsessed by mental unrest, used to become wandering 
hermits. The seeker for light must begin his search by a 
repudiation of the good things of the world. In con- 
formity with the ancient custom Buddha left his home 
and adopted the ascetic’s life. He cast off his dignity, 
put on the yellow robe and begged for his bread, wandering 
up and down the streets of the world seeking for light and 
peace. He made this great renunciation at the age of 
twenty-nine . 1 He tried to find spiritual rest by philo- 
sophic thought, and spent some time voyaging through 
strange seas of thought alone, but not with much success. 
Subtle dialectics are no cure for mental unrest. The other 
means of escape was through bodily austerities. Gautama 
went with five faithful friends to a solitary spot in the 
jungles of Uruvela and there gave himself up to fasting 
and other bodily mortifications of the most severe type, 
seeking peace of soul through the fervour of asceticism. 
He could not gain any solace from it, for the truth was as 
far off as ever. He was grow'ing desperate, and one night 
came very near dying, having fainted from fatigue and 
sheer starvation. Truth was yet a problem and life an 
interrogation. 


reason was shaken by it.” Quoted by W. S. Lilly : Many Mansions. See 
also Mahapadanasuttunta ; Khys Davids : Dialogues of Buddha, vol. ii. 

1 The popular story describes the act with great force. It is said that 
he aiose at midnight, went to the door of his wife’s chamber, and saw her 
sleep ng resting one hand on her baby’s head. He had wished to take 
his son in his arms for a last emb ace, but the fear of waking the young 
mother withheld him. He turned away and fled into the night in search 
for light. 



ETHICAL IDEALISM OF BUDDHISM 349 

After full six years of intense ascetic discipline Buddha 
became convinced of the futility of the method. The 
emptiness of wealth, the wisdom of the schools and the 
austerity of asceticism were all weighed in the balance and 
found wanting. With a body purified by abstinence, a 
mind refined by humility and a heart attuned by solitude, 
he sought wisdom in the wilderness. He turned to God’s 
creation in the world if haply he could learn the truth 
from the beauty of the dawn, the glory of the sun and the 
wealth of nature and life. He took to meditation and 
prayer. Legendary accounts speak of the doings of Mara 
to distract Buddha’s attention and turn him from his pur- 
pose, now by violent assaults, now by tempting allure- 
ments. Mara did not succeed. Seated under the “ botree ” 
on a bed of grass, Gautama remained facing the east, 
steadfast and immovable, with his mind fixed to a purpose — 
“ Never from this seat will I stir until I have attained 
the supreme and absolute wisdom.” He spent seven 
weeks under the tree. “ When the mind grapples with a 
great and intricate problem, it makes its advances, it 
secures its positions step by step, with but little realisation 
of the gains it has made, until suddenly, with an effect 
of abrupt illumination, it realises its victory. So it would 
seem it happened to Gautama.” 1 In one of his deeply 
meditative moods, while resting under the tree, to which 
his devoted followers gave the name of Bodhinanda, or 
scat of intelligence, a new light broke upon his mind. 
The object of his quest was in his possession. 

When he found enlightenment after years of steady 
search and meditation, he felt charged with the mission to 
announce to the doomed multitudes the way to everlasting 
felicity. He preached the gospel of the four Aryan truths 
and the eightfold path to the distracted world. Without 
troubling himself with the subtleties of metaphysics, he 
preached the ethical way, that he might save the masses 
of men living in sin and infamy. The serenity and gentle- 
ness of his face, the beauty and dignity of his life, the 
earnestness and enthusiasm of his love, the wisdom and the 
eloquence of his message won the hearts of men and women 
* Wells : The Outline of History, p. 207. 



350 INDIAN PHILOSOPHY 

alike. For his first pupils he selected the five ascetic 
friends of his. To them he uttered his first sermon on 
“ Dharmacakrapravartana,” or “ Setting in motion the 
Wheel of the Law.” They accepted his teaching and were 
duly ordained the first members of the Buddhist order 
or Sahglia. The number of disciples gradually increased. 
Missionaries were sent in all directions to teach the new 
dharma. The earliest converts and the most renowned 
were Sariputta and Mogallana, ascetics of Rajagrha, who 
received the truth from Assaji, one of the five original 
disciples. Buddha personally admitted them into the 
order. Other famous disciples who fill a large place in the 
early chronicles of Buddhism were Upa.fi, who recited the 
text of the Vinaya at the first council after the death of 
Buddha ; Kasyapa, the president of the Council, an im- 
portant Buddhist of the times, since it is said for his 
coming the cremation of Buddha’s body was delayed ; and 
Ananda, Buddha’s cousin and favourite pupil, who watched 
Buddha with tender feeling and great care and was nearest 
to him when he died. Thousands enrolled themselves 
among his adherents. A number of Brahmin teachers 
became converts to Buddhism. When Buddha visited his 
father's court twelve years after he left it, it was only to 
welcome his father and mother, wife and son to his fold. 
Many became lay disciples, and a few women were also 
permitted to form themselves into an order of Buddhist 
nuns. 

When he realised after a missionary life of nearly forty 
years that the time drew near for him to give up his body 
and attain parinirvana , 1 he spent his last hours in giving 
counsels and directions to Ananda and the assembled 
monks. Subhadra, a wandering ascetic, listened to his 
teaching in the last moments, and was the last disciple 
converted by Buddha himself. Buddha asked his disciples 
to state their doubts and difficulties that he might remove 
them. The}' kept silent. Then the Blessed One addressed 
his brethren : “ And now, brethren, I take my leave of 

1 While nirvana is attained and enjoyed during life, parinirvana could 
be realised only at death, with the dissolution of the bodily life. See Pari- 
nibbana Sutta, S.B.E., xi. 



ETHICAL IDEALISM OF BUDDHISM 351 


you : all the constituents of being are transitory : work 
out your salvation with diligence.” 1 He is said to have 
died at the age of eighty. The great Buddha typifies for 
all time the soul of the East with its intense repose, 
dreamy gentleness, tender calm and deep love. He is 
known by several names : Sakyamuni, the sage of Sakyas ; 
Tathagata, he who has arrived at the truth. 

The facts here mentioned may be accepted as authentic. 
There are other incidents mentioned in Lalitavistara 2 3 4 5 * and 
the Jataka tales, more or less legendary. 3 When w 7 e 
remember that the Buddhist works which give an account 
of the life of Buddha are 200 years later than the events 
to which they relate, it will not be a surprise that they 
contain much that is legendary, interwoven with much 
that is authentic.4 The teeming imagination of his fol- 
lowers embellished the story of his life with countless 
legends. The latter do not describe so much the real life 
of the teacher as the way he strikes their heart and 
imagination. 5 

1 Mahaparinibbanasutta, vi. I. Philosophy, according to Plato’s Pheedo 
is the meditation of death. Compare Marcus Aurelius : " All comes to stench 
and refuse at last. . . . All things are alike — familiar, fleeting, foul. . . . 
Anon earth will cover us all ; then earth in its turn will change ; then the 
resultant of the change ; then the resultant of the resultant, and so ad 
infinitum. The billows of change and variation roll apace, and he who 
ponders them will feel contempt for all things mortal.” Quoted in Edwyn 
Bevan’s Hellenism and Christianity, p. 185. 

* Edwin Arnold's Light of Asia. 

3 Nidanakatha, vol. i of the Jatakas and Buddhacarita by Asvaghosa. 

4 The earliest account of the life of Buddha is contained in the Mahapa- 
danasuttanta, Discourse No. 14 of Dlghanikaya. It is said to contain an 
autobiography of Buddha. 

5 While we are willing to admit that much of the popular account of 
Buddha is legendary, we are not so ready to accept the recent view that 
it is all a legend. We refer to the theory started by M. Senart and developed 
by a few others that the whole story of Buddha is a mere myth, added at 
a later date to a religion which had a natural growth. M. Senart maintains 
that we have in the story of Buddha a sun myth mixed with many other 
heterogeneous tendencies. We are not prepared to admit this hypothesis. 
The incidents related in the story of Buddha arc natural and belong to a 

real tradition. We have evidence of the early existence of the books. The 
religion of Buddha cannot be understood unless it is view id as the work 
of a real genius of commanding spiritual fer\our. Even M. Senant 
recognises Bucdha as a te. cher, but Winks a sun myth is woven into 
his life. The central incidents of B. d lia's life, however, cannot be 

thical. 



352 


INDIAN PHILOSOPHY 


V 

The Conditions of the Time 

Every system of thought embodies and reflects the 
tendencies of the time, and cannot be understood unless we 
realise the point of view from which it looked at the world, 
and the habit of thought which made it possible. From 
the unwritten literature later reduced to writing, it is 
possible to infer the condition of the times in which Buddha 
was born. There was not one vast Indian empire, but 
only princes of particular tribes and clans who were trying 
to form small states. Several dialects were in use, though 
Sanskrit was the one sacred language. The Vedas had 
already gained a mysterious sanctity. The customs and 
rules codified later in the laws of Manu were in force, 
though they had not the rigidity which they acquired at 
a later day. The six philosophical schools were not de- 
veloped, though the spirit of speculation which made them 
possible was at work. Moral life suffered, since meta- 
physical subtleties and theological discussions absorbed the 
energies of people. 

A congeries of conflicting theories and guesses, accepted 
by some and denied by others, changing with men, reflecting 
the individual characters, emotions and wishes of their 
authors, filled the air. There were no admitted facts or 
principles which all recognised, but only dissolving views 
and intuitions. Discussions were ripe about the finiteness 
or infiniteness, or neither or both, of the world and the self, 
and the distinction of truth and appearance, the reality of 
a world beyond, the continuance of the soul after death 
and the freedom of the willy Some thinkers identified 
mind and soul, others distinguished them from each other. 
Some held to the supremacy of God, others to that of man. 
Some argued that we know nothing about it ; others flat- 
tered their audiences with mighty hopes and confident 
assurances. Some were busy building elaborate meta- 
physical theories ; others were equally busy demolishing 
them. Many theories independent of the Vedic tradition 
arose. There were the Nigganthas, or fetter-freed; the 



ETHICAL IDEALISM OF BUDDHISM 353 


Samanas, or the ascetics who did not belong to the Brah- 
manical order ; those who sought peace of soul in the renun- 
ciation of the world ; those who practised self-mortification 
denying themselves nourishment for long periods ; those 
who tried spiritual abstraction, the dialecticians, the con- 
troversialists, the materialists and the sceptics, and those 
who are wise in their own conceit, like Saccaka, who had 
the audacity to say, “ I know no Samana, no Brahmana, 
no teacher, no master, no head of a school, even though 
he calls himself the holy supreme Buddha, who, if he face 
me in debate, would not totter, tremble, quake, and from 
whom the sweat would not exude. And if I attacked a 
lifeless pillar with my language, it would totter, tremble, 
quake ; how much more a human being ! ” 1 It was an 
age of speculative chaos, full of inconsistent theologies and 
vague wranglings. 2 

The exuberant fancy of the metaphysically minded 
thus sported with time, space and eternity, and vulgarised 
the noble art of philosophy. Great truths were hidden 
away in the fogs of misty metaphysics. It is those who 
do not see the truth that strike out in the paths of fiction. 
Buddha was struck by the clashing enthusiasms, the dis- 
cordant systems, the ebb and flow of belief, and drew from 
it all his own lesson of the futility of metaphysical think- 
ing. The salvation of the soul does not depend on minute 
distinctions of metaphysical conceits, or the habit of restless 
questioning, or the refinement of reason by the subtle dis- 
putes of sects. The indecision of thought, though it may 
not be taxing to the intellect of man, was injurious to his 
ethical interests. Anarchy in thought was leading to 
anarchy in morals. Therefore Buddha wished to steer 
clear of profitless metaphysical discussions. Whatever meta- 
physics we have in Buddhism is not the original Phamma 
but added to it (abhidhamma 3). Buddhism is essentially 
psychology, logic and ethics, and not metaphysics. ' 

1 Oldenberg : Buddha, p. 70. 

1 The sixty-two theories prevalent at the time of Gautama Buddha, 
mentioned in the Brahmajalasutta, are analysed by Rhys Davids iD his 
American lectures on Buddhism. 

3 Abhi, beyond; dhamma, physics. M-.dhamnas are further analysed 
in Abhidhan.na. Cf. Aristotle. See Atthasalini : Introductory Discourse. 



354 INDIAN PHILOSOPHY 

In the vast continent of India, man’s marvellous capa- 
city for creating gods, the stubborn impulse to polytheism 
had free scope. Gods and ghosts, with powers to injure 
and annoy, as well as to bless and glorify, governed the life 
of the peoples. The multitude esteemed highly the Vedic 
religion, with its creeds and rituals, rites and ceremonies. 
Like the pagans of Europe, who vowed to Mercury the 
tenth part of their goods to be enriched, or a cock to 
iEsculapius in order to be healed, they were busy pleasing 
the gods. Even the one Almighty God of the monotheists 
was a very human sort of god, though of a heroic mould, 
kindly when allowed his own way, angry when thwarted, 
and merciful when his rage had spent itself. The relation 
between the one God and his worshippers was that of 
master and slave. He is a revengeful war-lord, entitled 
to deal with us as He will and bid us stand against the 
foe in battle line. He interfered rather too much with the 
world. Comets were signs of His anger sent to warn a 
sinful world. If the warning is neglected, He may send a 
pestilence to decimate innocent people. Miracles were the 
order of the day. The universal prevalence of law, though 
conceived by the Upanisads, was not yet a living belief. 
Stern monotheism, moreover, resulted in a shifting of 
responsibility to God’s shoulders. If we are bad. He is 
responsible ; if good even He. Either from pure caprice 
or from the desire to avenge the slight offered to Him by 
the sinful act of some remote ancestor, He has doomed the 
majority of mankind to disappointment and suffering. 

Every sin is a violation of God’s law, and the only way 
to please Him is by repentance and rolling in the dust 
Sin is an offence against God, who alone has to be satisfied. 
People were indifferent to the natural consequences of sin, 
though lip allegiance was paid to the law of karma. Over 
all men’s activities there hung the thundercloud of an 
angry God. The result was that religion was distinguished 
from life, and God and the world were opposed. 

The cruel rites with which worship was accompanied 
shocked the conscience of Buddha. There is much damage 
done to the moral nature of man by a superstitious belief 
in God. Many good men do devil’s work in the belief 



ETHICAL IDEALISM OF BUDDHISM 355 


that it has divine sanction. It is difficult to overestimate 
the amount of evil which has resulted in the world from 
a confusion of morality and religion. Abraham is com- 
manded by God to sacrifice his son, and Saul is called 
upon to massacre his captives in cold blood. The views 
which under the name of religion crept into life and had 
so far prevailed as almost to extinguish any spark of 
spiritual vigour cut Buddha to the quick. 

The sceptics on this theory need not be moral. So 
long as morality is based on a divine command miracu- 
lously conveyed, every discovery of science and develop- 
ment of thought would impair the basis of morals. The 
feeble in faith may reject the sanctions of morality. 

■ Buddha, like Lucretius, felt that the world would be 
better for the triumph of natural law over supernaturalism. 
By announcing a religion which proclaimed that each 
man could gain salvation for himself without the mediation 
of priests or reference to gods, he would increase the respect 
for human nature and raise Ihe tone of morality. "It is 
a foolish idea to suppose that another can cause us happi- 
ness or misery.” 1 After Buddha did his work, the belief 
in the permanence and universality of natural law became 
almost an instinct of the Indian mind. 

We shall see later that the world of experience accord- 
ing to Buddha does not require for its explanation any 
God. The law of karma will do. There is the implication 
of the existence of the Highest, but it is not a matter of 
logical demonstration. Buddha endorses the Upanisad 
hypothesis and anticipates St. Paul’s judgment : “ 0 the 
depths of the riches both of the wisdom and knowledge 
of God ! How unsearchable are His judgments, and His 
ways past finding out.” 1 

The Upanisads were a sealed book to the people at 
large. Their teaching was lost in a jumbled chaos of 
puerile superstition. 3 There were people who advocated 

1 Bodhicaryavatara. a Romans xi. 33. 

3 Lalitavistara describes the state of India at the time Buddha preached 
in these words \ “ While at Uruvela J*>akya called to mind all the different 
forms of penances which people in his time were in the habit of submitting 
to and which they thought raised the mind above all carnality. * Here.' 
he thought, 'am I born in the Jambudvlja among people who have no 



356 INDIAN PHILOSOPHY 

tapas to bend the gods to their will. A dialogue of Buddha 
with an ascetic mentions twenty-two methods of self- 
mortification in respect of food and thirteen about clothing 
The beauty of renunciation was eclipsed by the barbarism 
of superstition. Those who attempted to raise their 
souls ran the danger of degrading themselves into beasts. 
The masses of men were addicted to the ceremonies and 
observances prescribed by those who live on food pro- 
vided by the faithful and whom Buddha describes as 
“ tricksters, droners out of holy words for pay, diviners, 
exorcists, ever hungering to add gain to gain.” 1 The 
priest who pretended to be the channel of divine power 
dominated the religion of the country. Buddha has nothing 
but warm admiration for the prophet of the soul, the true 
Brahmin, who was required to say, “ Silver and gold have 
I none.” But when the prophet became a priest, and 
amassed silver and gold, he lost the power and the prestige 
born of spiritual gifts, and could no more say to the lame 
man, “ Rise up and walk.” He ceased to cure the sick by 
initiating them into the life of spirit, but assuming high 
airs, he pretended to be in the confidence of the gods and 
addressed the needy : “ Son, make a sacrifice to God and a 
payment to me, and thy sins will be forgiven thee.” The 
system of salvation by silver could not answer to the deeper 
needs of the human heart. To the mass of men religion 
consisted in regular ceremonial, prayer and penance, puri- 
fications and prohibitions applicable to almost all rela- 
tions of human life. Buddha felt the hollowness of the 

prospect of intellectual redemption, crowded by Tlrthikas, or revealers of 
the truth, with diverse wishes, and at a time when their iaculties are wriggling 
in the grasp of the crocodile of their carnal wants. Stupid men who seek to 
purify their persons by diverse modes of austerity and penance, and inculcate 
the same. Some of them cannot make out their mantras ; some lick 
their hands; some are uncleanly; some have no mantras; some wander 
after different sources ; some adore cows, deer, horses, hogs, monkeys or 
elephants Seated at one place in silence with their legs bent under them, 
some attempt greatness. Some attempt to accomplish their penance by 
inhaling smoke or fire, by gazing at the sun, by performing the five fires, 
resting on one foot or with an arm perpetually uplifted or moving about 
the knees . . . some pride themselves on their saluting Brahma, Indra, Rudra, 
Vi$nu, De\I, Kumara.’ . . 

■ Rhys Davids : Buddhist India, p. 215 ; see also Dialogues 0) the Buddha, 
;. 15. 



ETHICAL IDEALISM OF BUDDHISM 357 


host of beliefs which people were wont to regard as 
articles of faith. He hated that men should play the fool 
for nothing. He raised his voice in indignant protest 
against superstition and unreason and bade his disciples 
cease playing with trifles and realise the spiritual laws of 
the world. He denied the divinity of the gods and under- 
mined the authority of the Vedas. 

Buddha felt most intensely the inevitable defects of an 
age of criticism and enlightenment, when ancient faith was 
undermined and the fancies of theology were disappearing 
like the shapes of a dream. Men’s souls were full of unrest, 
and desolating discord, and those unable to believe were 
looking out for a doctrine. The quest of the age was 
reflected in the spirit of early Buddhism. Buddha laid his 
finger on the heart’s desire for the true, the good and the 
beautiful. 

In the collapse of creeds and the disintegration of 
systems, it was the task of Buddha to provide a firm 
foundation for morality. As in the Greek world the larger 
and more comprehensive metaphysical systems of Plato and 
Aristotle were followed by the ethical speculations of the 
Stoics and the Epicureans, so it happened in ancient India. 
When the foundations of philosophy became shaken, the 
principles of conduct attracted the attention of thinkers. 
If ethics is made to rest on the shifting sands of meta- 
physics or theology, it has an uncertain tenure. Buddha 
wished to build it on the rock of facts. Ancient Buddhism 
resembles positivism in its attempt to shift the centre from 
the worship of God to the service of man. Buddha was 
not so keen about founding a new scheme of the universe 
as about teaching a new sense of duty. It was his privi- 
lege to start a religion independent of dogma and priest- 
hood, sacrifice and sacrament, which would insist on an 
inward change of heart and a system of self-culture. He 
made it clear that salvation does not depend on the 
acceptance of doubtful dogmas or doing deeds of darkness 
to appease an angry God. It depends on the perfection 
of character and devotion to the good. The moral law is 
not the chance invention of an exceptional mind, or the 
dogma of a doubtful revelation, but the necessary expres- 



358 INDIAN PHILOSOPHY 

sion of the truth of things. Ignorance of truth is, accord- 
ing to Buddha, the cause of all misery. To deny the moral 
value of austere asceticism, to repudiate the popular re- 
ligion, to despise the Vedic ceremonialism, in short, to make 
a religion of philosophy, is a great speculative venture, the 
daring of which we cannot rightly estimate. We find in 
the early teaching of Buddhism three marked charac- 
teristics, an ethical earnestness, an absence of any theological 
tendency and an aversion to metaphysical speculation. 

Buddha had to reckon with the decline of the sense 
for the supernatural and the ideas of faith. In a period 
of self-questioning and self-testing, when men learned to 
look with a sharper eye on all that has hitherto been 
unthinkingly accepted, it is impossible to exempt faith 
from criticism. When serious thinkers dismissed the soul 
as a phantom, and immortality as a hallucination, it was 
no use trying to demonstrate their reality. Buddha 
adopted the critical spirit, but wished to set limits to it. 
His attitude was a perfect contrast to the spirit of scep- 
ticism, indifference and flippancy which characterised the 
materialist thinkers ; yet he gathers up and concentrates 
the illumination of the age and gives us a penetrating criti- 
cism of traditional beliefs. After all, systems of thought 
and practice are only working hypotheses by which suc- 
cessive ages try to satisfy the aspirations and harmonise 
the results of advancing knowledge and growing insight. 
The environment is changed, knowledge has increased. 
The spirit of scepticism is afoot. Traditional religion has 
become unbelievable. Thinking men were devising some 
larger theories with which to walk through life and bring 
the ineradicable aspirations of human nature into harmony 
with the obvious data of experience. Buddha stood forth 
as the spokesman of the age. He was deeply influenced 
by the reaction setting in against the popular beliefs. There 
is no mistaking the fact that he merely accelerated what 
the stream of events was already rolling onward. He 
focussed the spirit of the age and gave a voice to the vague 
ana unsystematised feelings of thinking men. He was at 
once the prophet and the exponent of the time spirit. 
Hegel compares the man of genius in relation to his age 



ETHICAL IDEALISM OF BUDDHISM 359 


to one who places the last and the locking stone in an arch. 
Many hands help to build the structure, but it is in his 
hand alone that it becomes a complete work, sure and self- 
sustained. Such a master’s hand was that of Buddha, 
one of the greatest of India’s thinkers. Buddha’s relation 
to his predecessors is analogous to that of Socrates to the 
Sophists. While in one sense his system is an expression 
of the current of criticism, it was also destined to stem 
the tide by strengthening the spiritual though not the 
religious view of reality. Immortality may be unbelievable 
and God may be inconceivable, yet the demands of duty 
are absolute. 

We cannot consider Buddha a rationalist. Rationalism 
is defined as “ the mental habit of using reason for the 
destruction of religious beliefs .” 1 Buddha did not set 
out with the intention of reaching negative results. Being 
a disinterested seeker after truth, he did not start with 
any prejudice. Yet he is a rationalist, since he wished to 
study reality or experience without any reference to super- 
natural revelation. In this matter Buddha is at one 
with modern scientists, who are of opinion that the idea of 
supernatural interference should not be introduced into the 
logical interpretation of natural phenomena. Buddha had 
so firm a grip of the connectedness of things that he would 
not tolerate miraculous interferences of the cosmic order or 
magical disturbances of mental life. 

Feeling that there was no use in making an appeal to 
faith in an age which had lost all faith in faith, he relied 
on reason and experience and wished to lead men by mere 
force of logic to his view's. He wanted to establish a 
“ religion wfithin the bounds of pure reason,” and thus put 
an end to both superstition and scepticism. He rarely 
assumes the prophetic role. He is a dialectician, arguing 
with his opponents to lead them to liberation. He pre- 
sents to his followers the experience through which he 
himself has passed, and exhorts them to verify for themselves 
his views and conclusions. " The doctrine is not based on 
hearsay, it means ‘ come and see.' ” 2 " Buddha does not 

1 Beun : History oj English Rationalism in the Nineteenth Century , vol. i., 
p. 4, » Samyutta Nikaya, iii. 



360 


INDIAN PHILOSOPHY 


liberate men, but he teaches them how to liberate them- 
selves as he has liberated himself. Men adhere to his 
preaching of the truth, not because it comes from him, 
but because, aroused by his word, a personal knowledge of 
what he preaches arises in the light of their minds.” 1 
His method is that of psychological analysis. He en- 
deavoured to rid himself of all illegitimate speculation, build 
from the raw material of experience, and assist the spiritual 
growth of suffering humanity by an honest and unbiassed 
expression of the results of his thought and experience. 
According to him, ‘‘If a man sees things as they really 
are, he will cease to pursue shadows and cleave to the 
great reality of goodness.” Laying aside metaphysical 
speculations, he traces out the reign of law and order in 
the world of experience. Understanding, according to him, 
is to be limited to the field of experience, the laws of which 
it can explore. 


VI 

Buddha and the Upanisads 

For a revelation of the struggles of spirit and the experi- 
ences of the soul, Buddha had ready to hand that supreme 
work of the Indian genius, the Upanisads. Early Buddhism 
is not an absolutely original doctrine. It is no freak in the 
evolution of Indian thought. Buddha did not break away 
completely from the spiritual ideas of his age and country. 
To be in open revolt against the conventional and legalistic 
religion of the time is one thing ; to abandon the living 
spirit lying behind it is another. Buddha himself admits 
that the dharma which he has discovered by an effort of 
self-culture is the ancient way, the Aryan path, the eternal 
dharma. Buddha is not so much creating a new dharma 
as rediscovering an old norm. It is the venerable tradition 
that is being adapted to meet the special needs of the age. 
To develop his theory Buddha had only to rid the Upani- 
sads of their inconsistent compromises with Vedic poly- 
theism and religion, set aside the transcendental aspect as 

1 Oldenberg : Buddha . 



ETHICAL IDEALISM OF BUDDHISM 3G1 


being indemonstrable to thought and unnecessary to 
morals, and emphasise the ethical universaiism of the 
Upanisads. Early Buddhism, we venture to nazard a 
conjecture, is only a restatement of the thought of the 
Upanisads from a new standpoint. Rhys Davids says : 
“ Gautama was born and brought up and lived and died 
a Hindu. . . . There was not much in the metaphysics 
and principles of Gautama which cannot be found in one 
or other of the orthodox systems, and a great deal of his 
morality could be matched from earlier or later Hindu 
books. Such originality as Gautama possessed lay in the 
way in which he adopted, enlarged, ennobled and systema- 
tised that which had already been well said by others ; 
in the way in which he carried out to their logical conclu- 
sion principles of equity and justice already acknowledged 
by some of the most prominent Hindu thinkers. The 
difference between him and other teachers lay chiefly in 
his deep earnestness and in his broad public spirit of 
philanthropy.” 1 * “ It is certain that Buddhism has acquired 

as an inheritance from Brahmanism not merely a series 
of its most important dogmas, but what is not less signifi- 
cant to the historian, the bent of its religious thought and 
feeling, which is more easily comprehended than expressed 
in words.” 3 The contempt for ritualism was common to 
him and the Upanisads. Buddhism shared with the rest 
of Aryan India the belief in the law of karma and the 
possibility of attaining nirvana. That sorrow or suffering 
is the essential fact of life on earth is admitted by almost 
all schools of Indian thought, the Upanisads included. 
Buddha himself was not aware of any incongruity between 
his theory and that of the Upanisads. He felt that he 
had the support and sympathy of the Upanisads and 
their followers. He classed the Brahmins along with the 
Buddhist mendicants, and used the word as one of honour 
in reference to the Buddhist arhats and saints. Buddhism, 
in its origin at least, is an offshoot of Hinduism. " Buddhism 
grew and flourished within the fold of orthodox belief.” 3 

1 Buddhism, pp. 83-84. 

» Oldenberg : Buddha, p. 53. 

3 Rhys Davids: Buddhism, p. 85. 



362 


INDIAN PHILOSOPHY 


Throughout this account of early Buddhism we shall 
endeavour to show how the spirit of the Upanisads is 
the life-spring of Buddhism. 


VII 

Suffering 

From his spiritual experience, Buddha became con- 
vinced of the four noble truths, that there is suffering, 1 
that it has a cause, 1 that it can be suppressed, 3 and that 
there is a way to accomplish this.t 

The first noble truth is the tyranny of pain. Life is 
suffering. “ Now, this is the noble truth concerning suffer- 
ing. Birth is painful, decay is painful, disease is painful, 
death is painful, union with the unpleasant is painful ; 
painful is the separation from the pleasant, and any craving 
that is unsatisfied, that too is painful. In brief, the five 
aggregates 5 which spring from attachment are painful.” 6 
In the age of Buddha men of keen intellect and deep feeling 
were asking, What does all this weary round of existence 
mean ? and Buddha addressed his appeal to the men who 
were longing for a way of escape, a resort to nirvana, where 
the wicked cease from troubling and the weary are at rest. 
Insistence on suffering is not peculiar to Buddhism, though 
Buddha emphasised it overmuch. In the whole history of 
thought no one has painted the misery of human existence 
in blacker colours and with more feeling than Buddha. 
The melancholy foreshadowed in the Upanisads occupies 
the central place here. Possibly the ascetic ideals of an 
unreasoned exaltation of poverty, glorification of self- 
sacrifice, and an obsession of renunciation cast a hypnotic 
spell over Buddha’s mind. To make people long for escape 
from this world, its blackness is a little overdrawn. We 
may try all we can to spread comfort and happiness and 
suppress all social injustice, yet man will not have satis- 


« Duhkha. * Samudaya. 

3 Nirodha. 4 Marga. 

5 Body, feeling, perception, will and reason. 

* Foundation of the Kingdom of Righteousness, p. 5. 



ETHICAL IDEALISM OF BUDDHISM 363 


faction. Buddha concludes, existence is pain, the struggle 
to maintain individuality is painful, and the fluctuations 
of fortune are frightful . 1 In the Dhammapada, it is said: 
" Not in the sky nor in the depths of the ocean, nor having 
entered the caverns of the mountain, nay such a place is 
not to be found in the world where a man might dwell 
without being overpowered by death.” The most moral 
hero and the greatest w'ork of art must one day be cast 
down and consumed in death. All things pass away. Our 
dreams and hopes, our fears and desires — all of them will 
be forgotten as though they had never been. The great 
aeons will sweep on, the unending generations will hurry 
past. None can resist the universal supremacy of death. 
Death is the law of all life. The evanescence of all human 
things is a source of melancholy to which many are subject. 
Our mind cannot grasp the substance of what it aims at, 
nor our lives realise the visions it sees. All fulfilment of 
desire is attended with pain. The misery of human nature, 
with its eternal longing, which creates wants much in 
advance of man’s power of satisfying them, cannot but 
make us feel that life is a curse. Tormented by thought, 
cheated by chance, defeated by the forces of nature, 
oppressed by the massive weight of duty, the horror of 
death, the dread consciousness of coming lives where the 
tragedy of existence will be repeated, the individual cannot 
help crying, “ Let me escape, let me die.” The remedy 
for all the woes of earth lies in getting out of it. \ 


1 " The pilgrimage (samsara) of beings/" Buddha says, " has its begin- 
ning in eternity. No opening can be discovered, from which proceeding, 
creatures, mazed in ignorance, fettered by a thirst for being, stray and 
wander. What think ye, disciples, whether is more, the water which is in 
the four great oceans, or the tears which have flown from you and have 
been shed by you, while ye strayed and wandered on this long pilgrimage 
and sorrowed and wept, because that was your portion which ye abhorred 
and that which ye loved was not your portion ? A mother’s death, a brother’s 
death, the loss of relations, the loss of property, all this have ye experienced 
through long ages, and while ye experienced this through long ages, more 
tears have flowed from you and have been shed by you, while ye strayed 
and wandered on this pilgrimage, and sorrowed and wept, because that was 
your portion which ye abhorred, and that which ye loved was not your 
portion, than all the water which is in the four great oceans.” Sarhyutta 
Nikaya ; Oldenberg : Buddha, pp. 216-217 



364 INDIAN PHILOSOPHY 

To the thinking, the unutterable sadness of transience 
and the pitiful ineffectualness of virtue are the striking 
facts. Kant in his article on the “ Failure of Every Philoso- 
phical Attempt in Theodicy” (1791), refuting the optimism 
of Leibniz, asks : “ Would any man of sound understanding 
who has lived long enough and has meditated on the worth 
of human existence care to go again through life’s poor 
play, I do not say on the same conditions, but on any 
conditions whatever ? ” The gloominess and grief of the 
great philosophers are perhaps the products of their thought. 
Those who feel but do not think have a better lot. 

We cannot help feeling that Buddha overemphasises the 
dark side of things. The Buddhist view of life seems to 
be lacking in courage and confidence. Its emphasis on 
sorrow, if not false, is not true. The predominance of pain 
over pleasure is an assumption. Nietzsche had Buddha in 
mind when he said, " they meet an invalid, or an old man, 
or a corpse, and immediately they say, life is refuted.” 
After all, the value of life seems to rise with its evanes- 
cence. If the beauty of youth and the dignity of age are 
transient, so are the travail of birth and the agony of death. 
There is a tendency in Buddhism to blacken what is dark 
and darken what is grey. The outlook is restricted on 
principle to all that is sharp, bitter and painful in life. 

But Buddhism would justify Buddha’s attitude by 
saying that every religion exaggerates the suffering of life, 
for the aim of religion is the redemption from sin and 
suffering. With a happy world there would have been no 
need for religion. How can we escape from this w'orld of 
death ? is the question which the Upanisads ask, and 
Buddha is now asking it with a renewed force. Naciketas, 
the Brahmin, asked Yama, Death, in the Katha Upanisad : 
“ Keep thou thy houses, keep dance, and song for thyself. 
Shall we be happy with these things, seeing thee ? ” 1 
The Buddhist asks : “ How is there laughter, how is there 
joy, as the world is always burning ? Why do ye not seek 
a light, ye who are surrounded by darkness ? This body 
is wasted, full of sickness and frail ; this heap of corruption 
breaks to pieces. Life indeed ends in death.” 2 

* i. 1. 26. * Dhammapada, xi. 146. 148. 



ETHICAL IDEALISM OF BUDDHISM 365 


If pessimism means that life on earth is not worth living 
unless it be in purity and detachment, then Buddhism is 
pessimism. If it means that it is best to be done with 
life on earth for there is bliss beyond, then Buddhism is 
pessimism. But this is not true pessimism. A system is 
pessimistic if it stifles all hope and declares “ to live on 
earth is weariness and there is no bliss beyond.” Some 
forms of Buddhism do declare this and are justly called 
pessimistic. So far as the early teaching of Buddha is 
concerned, it is not that. It is true that it considers life to 
be an unending succession of torments, but it believes in 
the liberating power of ethical discipline and the perfecti- 
bility of human nature. Again, though the suffering of 
creation weighs upon Buddha’s mind, it does not seem to 
be purposeless. Desire is there to impel us to the supreme 
effort to abandon all desire. Each man has his own burden 
to bear, and every heart knows its own bitterness, and yet 
through it all goodness grows and progress becomes per- 
fection. The world with all its suffering seems adapted to 
the growth of goodness. Buddha does not preach the mere 
worthlessness of life or resignation to an inevitable doom. 
His is not a doctrine of despair. He asks us to revolt 
against evil and attain a life of a finer quality, an arhata 
state. 


VIII 

Causes of Suffering 

In answering the second question of the causes of 
suffering Buddhism has recourse to psychological analysis 
and metaphysical speculations. “ Now this is the noble 
truth of the origin of suffering. Verily it is the craving 
thirst that causes the renewal of becomings, that is accom- 
panied by sensual delights, and seeks satisfaction, now 
here, now there — that is to say, the craving for the gratifi- 
cation of the senses, or the craving for prosperity.” 1 

The Upanisads have already indicated the cause of 
suffering. To them the eternal is bliss and the transient 

» Foundation of the Kingdom of Righteousness, p. 6. 



366 INDIAN PHILOSOPHY 

painful. Yo vai bhiima tad amrtam any ad art am. The eternal 
unchanging is the truth, freedom and happiness, but the 
world of birth, old age and death is subject to suffering. 
The real is not to be found in the not-self, which is subject 
to origination and decease. It is there where these have 
no dominion. There is sorrow because all things are 
transient. They vanish as soon as they occur. The law 
of causality conditions all being which is in a state of 
perpetual becoming, arising and passing away. “ There 
are three things, O King, which you cannot find in the 
world. That which, whether conscious or unconscious, is 
not subject to decay and death, that you will not find. 
That quality of anything (organic or inorganic) which is 
not impermanent, that you will not find. And in the 
highest sense there is no such thing as being possessed of 
being.” 1 " And that which is transient, 0 monks, is it 

painful or pleasant ? ” “Painful, Master.” 2 Sorrow is one 
with transiency. Desires cause suffering, since we desire 
what is impermanent, changeable and perishable. It is 
the impermanence of the object of desire that causes dis- 
appointment and regret. All pleasures are transient. The 
fundamental proposition of the system that life is sorrow 
is dogmatically accepted from the Upanisads. 

Buddha establishes that there is nothing permanent, 
and if only the permanent deserved to be called the self 
or Atman, then nothing on earth is self. Everything is 
anatta or not-self. " All are impermanent, body, sensation, 
perception, Saiikharas and consciousness, all these are 
sorrow. They are all not-self.” Nothing of them is sub- 
stantial. They are appearances empty of substance or 
reality. What we consider the self is a succession of 
empty shows too insignificant to be worth fighting about. 
If men quarrel about them, it is because of their ignorance. 
“ On what existing do decrepitude and death come into 
existence, and on what do they depend ? On birth taking 
place, decrepitude and death come into existence, and 
they depend on birth ... on ignorance subsiding, ideas 

i Milinda, iv. 7. 12 ; sec also Bhikkhunlsarhyutta ; Dhammapada, v. 
47-48 ; and Oldenberg : Buddha, pp. 218-219. 

• See Majjhima Nikaya, iii. 19; Buddhawhcra : AtthasalinI, E.T., p. 74. 



ETHICAL IDEALISM OF BUDDHISM 367 


subside, and on its cessation is their cessation, on the 
cessation of ideas is the cessation of apprehension.” 1 
Ignorance is the main cause out of which false desire 
springs. When knowledge is attained suffering is at an 
end. Ignorance and false desire are the theoretical and the 
practical sides of one fact. The empty abstract form of 
false will is ignorance, the concrete realisation of ignorance 
is false will. In actual life the two are one. To the 
Buddhist, as to the Indian thinkers in general, knowledge 
and wall are so closely related that no distinction is drawn 
between them. The same word celana is used to signify 
both thinking and willing. As we shall see, exercises of 
thought are looked upon as preparatory to the purifying 
of heart and will. Ignorance of truth is the antecedent 
condition of all life. For one clear, piercing, scrutinising 
glance is enough to make us feel that nothing on earth, 
wife or child, fame or honour, love or wealth is worth 
pursuing. " For all that is, when clung to falls short.” 2 
A wonderful philosophy of dynamism was formulated 
by Buddha 2,500 years ago, a philosophy which is being 
recreated for us by the discoveries of modern science and 
the adventures of modern thought. The electro-magnetic 
theory of matter has brought about a revolution in the 
general concept of the nature of physical reality. It is 
no more static stuff but radiant energy. An analogous 
change has pervaded the world of psychology, and the title 
of a recent book by M. Bergson, Mind Energy, indicates 
the change in the theory of psychical reality. Impressed 
by the transitoriness of objects, the ceaseless mutation 
and transformation of things, Buddha formulated a philo- 
sophy of change. He reduces substances, souls, monads, 
things to forces, movements, sequences and processes, and 
adopts a dynamic conception of reality. Life is nothing 
but a series of manifestations of becomings and extinc- 
tions.3 It is a stream of becoming.4 The world of sense 
and science is from moment to moment. It is a recurring 

1 Lalitavistara. 1 Majjhima Nikaya, 32. 

3 Patubhavo-uppado. 

4 “ All things are in a state of flux." " Reality is a condition of unrest.” 
(Heraclitus: Fragments, 46 and 84.) 



368 


INDIAN PHILOSOPHY 


rotation of birth and death. Whatever be the duration of 
any state of being, as brief as a flash of lightning or as long 
as a millennium, yet all is becoming. All things change. 
All schools of Buddhism agree that there is nothing human 
or divine that is permanent. Buddha gives us a discourse 
on fire 1 to indicate the ceaseless flux of becoming called 
the world. 1 


Worlds on worlds are rolling ever. 

From creation to decay. 

Like the bubbles on a river. 

Sparkling, bursting, borne away.l 

Though the flame maintains itself unchanged in appear- 
ance, every moment it is another and not the same flame. 
The stream is sustained in its flow by ever new waters. 
The becoming of all that is, is the central fact of Buddhism. 
Absolute reality is not the property of anything on earth. 
“It is impossible that what is born should not die.” 4 
" Whatever is subject to origination is subject also to 
destruction.” 5 Necessary and inexorable is the dying of 
all that is born. The difference is only in the degree of 
duration. A few may last for years, and others for a brief 
while. Change is the stuff of reality. There is neither 
permanence nor identity with regard to the world. It is 
only the transmitting of force. The idea might have arisen 
from reflection on consciousness and the apparent transi- 
toriness of all objects of nature. Uninterrupted change 
is the feature of our conscious life. The living universe is 
a reflection of our mind. Each single phenomenon is but 
a link in the chain, a transitory phase of evolution, and 
the several chains constitute the one whole, dharmadhdtu, 
or the spiritual universe. Buddha adopts the golden mean 
even here. “ This world, O Kaccana, generally proceeds 
on a duality, on the ‘it is ' and the ‘ it is not.’ But, O 
Kaccana, whoever perceives in truth and wisdom, how 

* Cf. Heraclitus : “ This world is an eternally living fire.” Buddha 

and Heraclitus both use fire, the most mutable of the elements, to represent 
the metaphysical principle of becoming. 

1 Mahavagga, i. 121. 3 Shelley: Hellas. 

« Abhidharmakosavyakhya. 5 Mahavagga, 1-23. 



ETHICAL IDEALISM OF BUDDHISM 369 

things originate in the world, in his eyes, there is no ‘ it is 
not.’ . . . Whoever, Kaccana, perceives in truth and wisdom 
how things pass away in this world, in his eyes there is 
no ‘it is ’ in this world. . . . ‘ Everything is ’—this is one 
extreme, 0 Kaccana. ‘ Everything is not ’ is another 
extreme. The truth is the middle.” 1 It is a becoming 
without beginning or end. There is no static moment 
when the becoming attains to beinghood. No sooner than 
we conceive it by the attributes of name and form than it 
has changed to something else. 2 3 

How do we come to think of things, rather than of 
processes in this absolute flux ? By shutting our eyes to 
the successive events. It is an artificial attitude that 
makes sections in the stream of change, and calls them 
things. Identity of objects is an unreality. Out of the 
conditions and relations we build a seemingly stable uni- 
verse. In dealing with the world we have to employ 
relations of different kinds, such as substance and quality, 
whole and part, cause and effect, which are mutually 
involved. The eight principal relative conceptions which 
we ignorantly regard as absolute are origination and cessa- 
tion, persistence and discontinuance, unity and plurality, 
coming and going. Even the modes of existence and non- 
existence are mutually dependent, so that one is possible 
only in relation to the other. All these relations are con- 
tingent and not necessary. They are not true, as Kant 
would say, of things in themselves.3 They operate only in 
our world, i.e. the world of appearance or phenomena. So 
long as we look upon these limited and relative concep- 
tions as absolutely true, we are subject to ignorance, the 
cause of life’s misery. When we know the truth of things, 
we shall realise how absurd it is for us to worship isolated 
products of the incessant series of transformations as though 
they were eternal and real. Life is no thing or state of a 
thing, but a continuous movement or change. It is the 
Bergsonian attitude in germ. 

1 Samyutta Nikaya. Oldenberg : Buddha, p. 249. 

* See Saiiiyutta Isikaya, xxii. 90. 16. 

3 Time, according to Buddliaghr-sa, is “a notion abstracted by mere 
usage from this or that event," Atthasalinl, E.T., p. 78. 



370 INDIAN PHILOSOPHY 

Identity of objects is only another name for continuity 
of becoming. A child — a boy — a youth — a man — an old 
man are one. The seed and the tree are one. The 
banyan tree a thousand years old is one and the same 
plant with the seed out of which it has grown. It is the 
succession that gives the appearance of an unbroken 
identity. Though the substance of our bodies as well as the 
constitution of our souls changes from moment to moment, 
still we say it is the same old thing or the same old man. 
A thing is only a series of states of which the first is said 
to be the cause of the second, for they seem to be of the 
same nature. The seeming identity from moment to 
moment consists in a continuity of moments which we may 
call the continuity of an ever changing identity. The 
world is a number of accidents ever changing and being 
renewed at every breath and each moment disappearing, 
only to be replaced by a similar set. In consequence of 
this rapid succession, the spectator is deceived into the 
belief that the universe is a permanent existence, even as 
a glowing stick whirled round produces the appearance of 
a complete circle. A useful convention makes us give 
names and forms to the individual. The identity of name 
and form is no evidence of the identity of the inner 
reality. Again, we are naturally led to imagine a per- 
manent core, but it is an abstraction of thinking. We say 
it rains, while there is no “ it ” at all. There is nothing but 
movement, no doer but deed, nothing else but a becoming. 

To account for the continuity of the world in the 
absence of a permanent substratum, Buddha announces 
the law of causation and makes it the basis of continuity. 
The law of universal causation, with its corollary of the 
eternal continuity of becoming, is the chief contribution of 
Buddhism to Indian thought. Existence is transformation. 
It is a series of successive states. All things undergo the 
changes indicated in utpada (origination), sthiti (staying), 
jar a (growth), and nirodha (destruction). “ Know that 
whatever exists arises from causes and conditions, and is in 
every respect impermanent.” Whatever has a cause must 
perish. '* Anything whatever born, brought into being and 
organised, contains within itself the inherent necessity of 



ETHICAL IDEALISM OF BUDDHISM 371 


dissolution.” ” All component things must grow old.” 
Every substance is organic, and its existence is only a con- 
tinuity of changes, each of which is determined by its pre- 
existing conditions. A thing is only a force, a cause, a 
condition. It is called a dharma. “ I will teach you the 
dharma,” says Buddha, " that being present, this becomes ; 
from the arising of that, this arises. That being absent, 
this does not become ; from the cessation of that, this 
ceases.” 1 For Buddha, as for the Upanisads, the whole 
world is conditioned by causes. While the Upanisads say 
that things have no self-existence as such, but are products 
of a causal series which has no beginning or end, Buddha 
says things are the products of conditions. The Upanisads 
are as clear as early Buddhism, that in this world of unrest- 
ing change and eternal becoming there is no firm resting 
place for man. 

That which constitutes being in the material realm of 
things is only the fiaticcasamuftfiada, or the origin of one 
thing in dependence on another. Causality is always a 
self-changing or becoming. The essence of a thing, its 
dharma, is its immanent law of relation. There is no 
being which changes. There is only a self-changing or self- 
forming. We cannot say, as in the Nyaya philosophy, that 
one thing is the cause of something else. For a thing is 
what it is, and it cannot become something else. As the 
world process is affiliated to conscious growth, so is the 
force of causality related to inner motivation. Organic 
growth is the type of all becoming. The past is drawn 
up into the moving flow. The difficulty of external causa- 
tion is due to the fact that in the outside world our know- 
ledge is confined to relations of phenomena. But in our 
inner consciousness we know that our will determines acts. 
The same force operates throughout. Schopenhauer calls 
it the “ will.” Buddha calls it “ karma.” It is the one 
reality, the thing in itself of which the whole world is the 
working out. In the external world causation becomes 
uniform antecedence. That is the cause, given which 
another occurs. After all the trouble of modern philosophy, 
causation is not defined in more adequate terms. Students 
1 Majjhima Nikaya, ii. 32. 



372 INDIAN PHILOSOPHY 

of natural science like Karl Pearson ask us to replace the 
idea of causation by the category of correlation. Cause 
and effect represent earlier and later stages of a continuous 
process. We describe the course of events by the aid of 
the formula of causality, but do not explain why things 
happen as they do. Ultimate causes may be the province 
of metaphysics, but observation is limited to secondary 
causes. The aim of Buddhism is not philosophical explana- 
tion, but scientific description. So Buddha answers the 
question of the cause of any given state of a thing by describ- 
ing to us the conditions of its coming about, even in the 
spirit of modern science. 

The causal evolution is not to be viewed as a mechanical 
succession of movements, in which case the world process 
becomes a series of extinctions and fresh creations, but is 
one state working itself up to another state or informing 
it with a ceaseless pulsation. It is the determination of 
the present by the past. Buddhism believes in transitive 
causation, where one state transmits its paccayasatti, or 
causal energy, to some newly conceived germ. Causal 
relations are of the type of the seed growing into the tree, 
where the one is necessary for the other. All life is force. 
Though we can never see the working of the force, it is 
there ; in consciousness we feel its presence. The world- 
process is of the nature of a self-acting development. It 
appears to be a series of incessantly succeeding phenomena, 
while it is a continuous development comparable to an 
indivisible melody. There is a cohesion of the past with 
the present which is broken up into a succession of before 
and after in our external treatment of nature. Then life 
becomes just one thing after another, and causality becomes 
mere succession, as Nagasena asserts. 

The doctrine of impermanence held in common by the 
Upanisads and early Buddhism is developed by later 
Buddhism into the view of momentariness. But to say that 
things are anitya or impermanent is different from saying 
that they are momentary or ksanika. Buddha holds that 
only consciousness is momentary and not things, for he 
says : “ It is evident that the body lasts one year ... a 
hundred years and even more. But that which is called 



ETHICAL IDEALISM OF BUDDHISM 373 

mind, intellect, consciousness, keeps up an incessant round 
by day and by night, of perishing as one thing and spring- 
ing up as another.” 1 It was Buddha’s interest to show 
that body, mind, etc., are not the true self. They are not 
the permanent. Impermanence when predicated of things 
in general does not mean momentariness. It is only when 
Buddha speaks of mind that he uses the analogy of a 
flame. The flame of a lamp is a succession of flames each 
of which lasts only an instant, and thought ( citta ) process 
is of the same type. He clearly distinguishes the momentary 
character of mental processes from the impermanent nature 
of non-mental reality. When this momentary character is 
extended to all existence we get the ksanikavdda. 
Later Buddhists believe that all existence is momentary. 
Permanent existence, they argue, is a self-contradiction. 
Existence or sattva means practical efficiency, or artha- 
kriyakaritva. Existence is the capacity to produce some 
change in the order of things. The seed exists since it 
produces shoots. Permanent things, however, cannot possess 
this power of producing changes. If things were unchanged 
in past, present and future, there would be no reason why 
they should produce different effects at different points of 
time. If it is said that the potential power is permanent, 
and it becomes actual when certain other conditions are 
fulfilled, it is replied that whatever has power to do a thing 
does it, and whatever does not do it has no power. If the 
conditions bring about the change, then they alone exist 
and not the permanent thing. If existence means causal 
efficiency, then things that exist are momentary. 
“ Strictly speaking, the duration of the life of a living 
being is exceedingly brief, lasting only while a thought 
lasts. Just as a chariot wheel in rolling rolls only at one 
point of the tyre, and in resting rests only at one point ; 
in exactly the same way the life of a living being lasts 
only for the period of one thought. As soon as that thought 
has ceased the living being is said to have ceased.” 1 On 


1 Samyutta, ii. 96. Buddha does not say so definitely as Bergson does 
that the difference between the two, consciousness and matter, is only a 
difference of tension, or rhythm, or rate of moving. 

* Visuddhimagga, chap, viii. 



374 INDIAN PHILOSOPHY 

this view of momentariness with which Buddhism became 
identified very early in its career, the nature of movement 
is hard to grasp. When a body seems to move, what happens 
is that it is continuously renewed. It is reborn each moment, 
as a flame which is always being renewed and never remains 
even for a moment identical with itself. 

Nature is one continuous vibration, an infinite growth 
bound by an iron chain of causality. It is a continuous 
whole, one and indivisible. Anything that happens sends 
a throb through the whole circle of existence, which is only 
another name for ceaseless change. Even in the mere 
mechanism of a soulless universe Buddhism sees an eternal 
cosmic law or ordered procedure. It is “ a mighty maze, 
but not without a plan.” 1 The wheel of the cosmic order 
goes on “ without maker, without known beginning, con- 
tinuously to exist by nature of concatenation of cause and 
effect.” 2 

The order of the universe is called in Pali, Niyama, or 
the process of going on. Some time before the period of 
Buddhaghosa (fifth century a.d.), and after the collection 
of the pitakas, five orders were distinguished and named 
Kammaniyama, or order of act and result ; Utuniyama, or 
physical inorganic order; Bijaniyama, or order of plants, 
the organic order ; Cittaniyama, or order of conscious life ; 
Dhammaniyama, or order of the norm, or the effect of 
nature to produce a perfect type. It is Kammaniyama 
that declares that good and bad actions result in desirable 
and undesirable results. It represents the universal fact 
that certain acts, bodily, mental, etc., eventually result in 
pain to the doer and his fellows while other acts bring 
happiness to both. It is the sequence of deed and effect 
that Kamma emphasises. 

This huge world of life and motion, which is always 
becoming, always changing, growing, striving, has yet a 
law at the centre of it. This is the main destinction between 
early Buddhism and Bergsonism. To Bergson life means 
the absence of law, to Buddha all life is an illustration of- 
a general law. The Buddhistic conception of life and law 
lights with its splendour the discoveries of science and gives 

1 Pope. • Buddhagho?a : Visuddhimagga, xvii. 



ETHICAL IDEALISM OF BUDDHISM 375 


meaning to the deepest instincts of man. The certainty of 
law is able to lift the awful weight which the suffering of 
life has laid upon the human spirit and fills the future 
with hope, for the individual can reach beyond the struggle 
and suffering inseparable from life if only he strives for it. 

The fundamental difference between Buddhism and the 
Upanisads seems to be about the metaphysical reality of 
an immutable substance, which is the true self of man as 
well. We have to decide whether it is the idea of Buddha 
to look upon the universal order as coming out of nothing 
and going back to nothing. It is true that Buddha finds no 
centre of reality or principle of permanence in the flux of 
life and the whirl of the world, but it does not follow that 
there is nothing real in the world at all except the agitation 
of forces. The vital question is that of the original cause 
which set the wheel in motion. Who gave the impetus ? 
If the mind is a flux and the object world another, is there 
or is there not a whole in which the two have their 
being ? If our attention is confined to the phenomenal 
world, we cannot say on what the world rests, elephant 
on tortoise or tortoise on elephant, whether the causality 
of the world is the creation of God, or the evolution of a 
substance, or a natural unfolding out of its own interior. 
Buddha simply accepts the facts of experience. Things 
change. There is no being in the world, but only becoming. 
In such a state the supreme reality is the law of change, 
and that is causality. Buddha does not speak of any final 
cause or chance. The universe is governed by necessity. 
There is no chaotic anarchy or capricious interference. 
Oldenberg expresses the difference between the Brahmanical 
and the Buddhistic conceptions in these words : “ The 
speculation of Brahmins apprehended being in all becoming, 
that of the Buddhists becoming in all apparent being. In 
the former case substance without causality, in the latter 
causality without substance.” 1 This description exagger- 
ates the dominant aspects of the two systems, which are 
agreed on the fundamentals, though there is a difference 
in the distribution of emphasis. For the Upanisads as 
much as for Buddha, “ the universe is a living whole, 

1 Buddha, p. 251. 



376 INDIAN PHILOSOPHY 

which, apart from violence and partial death, refuses to 
divide itself into well-defined objects and clear-cut dis- 
tinctions.” 1 It is an undivided movement. The Upani- 
sads do not posit a mere being exclusive of becoming. 
They do not regard the world of becoming as an illusion. 
Even Oldenberg admits that the thinkers of the Upanisads 
perceived an aspect of being in all becoming. They do not 
look upon the world of becoming as an unrelated proces- 
sion of states. It may be appearance, but yet it is the 
appearance of reality. The Upanisads exclude the idea of 
absolute change by calling attention to the fact that there 
is a permanent underlying the flux. Changes are alterna- 
tions in the special determinations, or accidents of a per- 
manent substance. While the whole is unchangeable, the 
changes are the relative determinations of aspects of the 
whole, and these successive phases are bound by law. 
Buddha does not say that all change involves a permanent 
that changes, nor does he say that change alone is per- 
manent, as some of his followers interpret him. He is 
indifferent to the “ being ” of things and finds the reality 
relevant to our practical interests in growth. But even if 
we hold with Nagasena that we have only sequence, we cannot 
help asking, if everything is conditioned, is there an uncon- 
ditioned ? Without it causality contradicts itself. If each 
phenomenon is referred to another as its sufficient reason and 
that again to another, we cannot in the nature of the case find 
a sufficient reason for anything. We must somehow get 
beyond the category of cause to some being which is its own 
cause and remains one with itself in spite of all its changes. 
When we say that the transient is known as transient, we 
oppose it to the eternal, and the question of the reality of 
the eternal is raised. Either we should look upon the ulti- 
mate reality as a growing principle, or we must admit some 
permanent element which manifests and maintains itself in 
the whole process of change. In any case a principle of 
being or identity is admitted. 

According to Aristotle, identity is necessary for all 
change. All change involves a permanent that changes. 
We cannot think of change without a permanent. It is 

* Bradley. 



ETHICAL IDEALISM OF BUDDHISM 377 


the truth contained in Kant’s Second Analogy of Experience. 
“ Without the permanent, no relations in time are pos- 
sible.” The succession of “ B ” upon “ A ” means that 
“ A ” is over before ‘‘ B ” begins. The relation between 
them called succession cannot exist for either " A ” or 
“ B,” but only for something present to each of them. If 
there were nothing but successive events in the world, 
nothing but “ A ” vanishing before “ B ” begins, “ B ” 
before “ C ” begins, and so on, there could be no succes- 
sion. The possibility of any succession implies a relative 
permanence. There must be something not in the succession 
but permanent that can carry on each vanishing moment 
of the succession and add it to the next. Even if we grant 
that all change implies a relative permanent, still the 
possibility of everything being relatively permanent implies 
an absolute permanence. We cannot resolve the whole 
into a network of relations, a mere mass of connections 
with nothing to be connected. It is like the flight without 
the bird. Thinghood is not exhausted by mutual relations. 
Buddha, limiting his attention to the world of experience, 
regards being as a continuous process. It is the view 
popularised by Bergson in modern philosophy, that the 
reality of the phenomena lies in the transition or becoming, 
but not in the things viewed. Avidya gives us the illu- 
sory view of static substances. Knowledge gives us insight 
into the impermanence of things, but yet the changes are 
all self-changes, which obey an immanent law of causality. 

If we accept the momentariness view, we have to admit 
causation and continuity with their correlates of permanence 
and identity, or resolve the world into a devil’s dance of 
wild forces, and give up all attempts at comprehending it. 
Sarhkara points out the inconsistency betw'een causation 
with its implication of permanence and the momentariness 
doctrine thus : “ According to the Buddhists everything 
has a momentary existence. So when the second moment 
arrives, the thing which was existing in the first moment 
ceases to exist, and an entirely new thing springs up. 
Accordingly, you cannot maintain that the preceding 
thing is the cause of the succeeding thing, or that the latter 
is the effect of the former The preceding thing, according 



378 INDIAN PHILOSOPHY 

to the theory of momentariness, has ceased to be when 
the succeeding moment arrives ; that is to say, the former 
becomes non-existent when the thing of the succeeding 
moment comes into being, and therefore cannot be regarded 
as producing the latter, since non-existence cannot be the 
cause of existence.” 1 The validity of this objection is 
admitted by some later Buddhists, 2 who argue that there 
is a permanent element underlying all changes. Mr. Sogen 
says : “ The substratum of everything is eternal and per- 
manent. What changes every moment is merely the phase 
of a thing, so that it is erroneous to affirm that according 
to Buddhism the thing of the first moment ceases to exist 
when the second moment arrives.” 3 

Confining his attention to the relative world of becoming, 
Buddha did not posit, like the thinkers of the Upanisads, 
a universal, all-sustaining life beating in every human 
heart, and the centre of the world. We cannot, however, 
deny the reality of the absolute simply because it is inac- 
cessible to knowledge. If all that is, is conditioned, when 
the conditions are exhausted we get a blank. Oldenberg 
observes : “ The conditional can only be thought of as 

conditioned through another conditional. If we follow the 
dialectic consequence solely, it is impossible on the basis 
of this theory of life to conceive how, where a series of 
conditions has run out, annihilating itself, anything else is 
to be recognised as remaining but a vacuum.” 4 Buddha, 
agreeing with the Upanisads, holds that the phenomena 
of the world as known to our intellect possess only a con- 
ditioned existence. Our intellect compels us to posit an 
unconditioned being as the condition of the empirical 
series. This necessary being is not itself a member of the 
series. To be free from the law of contingency and 
dependence, it must be a non-empirical condition. Yet it 
cannot be detached completely from the empirical series, 
for in this case the latter would become unreal. Every- 
thing seems to be, yet not to be ; it is at once being and 

1 V.S., chap. ii. n g. 

* E g., the Sarvastivadins. 

J Systems of Buddhistic Thought, p. 134. 

* Oldenberg : Buddha, p. 277. 



ETHICAL IDEALISM OF BUDDHISM 379 


becoming. Every event compels us to pass beyond it into 
some preceding form of existence, out of which the event 
has come as its evolved equivalent. This theory that 
everything existing is and is not, is real and unreal, sug- 
gests the idealistic view of becoming, which is only an 
evolution of being. This is the main tendency of Buddha’s 
teaching. Every existence is a mediation of two opposites, 
and so far as this world is concerned it is not possible for 
us to separate being and non-being. If we try to isolate 
either of them and determine it strictly by itself, it 
crumbles again, leaving mere nothingness behind. The 
empirical real is the intermediate thing, the progress, the 
movement from not-being to being, the becoming. Buddha 
is convinced of the futility of the logic which attempts to 
deal with objects of sense or thought as though they were 
fixed and static entities instead of phases in an eternal 
process or realisation. His silence on the absolute indicates 
that the eternal substance is not in his view available for 
the explanation of phenomena. Experience is all that is 
open to our knowledge, and the unconditioned lies beyond 
experience. There is no need to waste our time in fruit- 
less efforts to grasp what always eludes us. A strict inter- 
pretation of the relativity of human knowledge compels us 
to admit the impossibility of demonstrating the existence 
or otherwise of a permanent element. Though Buddhism 
and the Upanisads refuse to see ultimate reality of sub- 
stance or being in the ever changing sequence, the differ- 
ence at most is that while the Upanisads assert a reality 
beyond change or becoming. Buddhism adopts a suspense 
of judgment on this question. In no sense is this healthy 
non-committal attitude to be construed into a denial of an 
ultimate being. It is impossible to think that Buddha 
recognised nothing permanent in this rush of the world, 
no resting-place in the universal turmoil where man’s 
troubled heart can find peace. However much Buddha 
tried to refuse to reply to the question of the ultimate reality 
which lay beyond the categories of the phenomenal world, 
he did not seem to have had any doubt about it. “ There 
is an unborn, an unoriginated, an unmade, an uncompounded ; 
were there not, O mendicants, there would be no escape 

VOL. i 13 



380 


INDIAN PHILOSOPHY 


from the world of the born, the originated, the made and the 
compounded.” 1 Buddha believed in an ontological reality 
that endures beneath the shifting appearances of the visible 
world. 


IX 

The World of Change 

Is the becoming of the world real and objective ? The 
main tendency of Buddha is to represent the universe as a 
continuous flow, which is nissatta, or nonentity, nijjxva, or 
soullessness. All that is, is dliamma or grouping of condi- 
tions. It is unreal, but not non-existent. Yet there are 
passages in the early teaching of Buddha which counte- 
nance a purely subjective interpretation of the world. The 
world of object is conditioned by the individual as subject. 
It is within each of us. “ Verily, I declare unto you, that 
with this very body, mortal as it is, and only a fathom 
high, but conscious and endowed with mind, is the world, 
and the waxing thereof and the waning thereof and the 
way that leads to the passing away thereof.” 2 Buddha 
tells the monk who is worried about the question of what 
remains after liberation : “ The question is to be put 

thus : ‘ Where no more is there earth, or water, or fire, 
or wind ? where are dissolved both long and short, and 
large and small, and good and bad ? where are subject 
and object wholly remainderless melted away ? ’ The 
answer is : ‘ By the undoing of consciousness wholly 

remainderless all is melted away.’ " 3 On the subject the 
world rests ; with it it arises and with it it passes away. 
The world of experience is through and through such stuff 
as our dreams are made of. Hard facts of the world are 
a series of sensations. We do not know whether there 
are things to which oui ideas refer. The rotation of the 
world is consequent on the force of karma and ignorance. 
There are also passages which support the interpretation 
that the particulars of the world are individuations of the 

* Udana, viii. 3. 

* Rhys Davids : Dialogues of the Buddha, i. p. 279. It is also suggested 
that the world does not rx.st for the enlightened one. 

S : B^'^dkist Essay*, p 310. 



ETHICAL IDEALISM OF BUDDHISM 381 


one reality, which has neither particularity nor individuality. 
These are forms, which reality assumes, when it becomes 
an object of knowledge. While the former view dissolves 
the world into a dream positing nothing behind the flux, 
the latter reduces the world of knowledge to an appear- 
ance of a trans-empirical reality. 1 The latter is more 
Kantian while the former is more Berkeleyan. We may 
say that the latter interpretation corresponds to the hypo- 
thesis of Schopenhauer that the metaphysical principle is 
the will to live, and things and persons are varied objecti- 
fications of the one will to live. It is also sometimes sug- 
gested that our imperfection called ignorance breaks up 
the one continuous cosmic process into the individual 
persons and separate things. Statements are not wanting 
to the effect that composite substances disappear when 
true knowledge arises, leaving behind the truth of the 
primary elements. The Leibnizean view that simple things 
are permanent while complex things are bound to be dis- 
solved is familiar to early Buddhistic speculation. It 
looks upon the soul also, however, as a combination, and there- 
fore subject to dissolution. The simple indestructible ele- 
ments are conceived materially as earth, water, light, air, 
to which the Vaibha§ikas add a fifth, ether. That an absolute 
Sunya or void abstract space is the reality may be traced to 
some passages, such as Buddha’s answer to Ananda inquir- 
ing about the cause of earthquakes : “ This great earth, 
Ananda, is established on water, the water on wand, and 
the wind rests upon space .” 1 " Venerable Nagasena, 

there are found beings in the world who have come into 
existence through karma, and others who are the result 
of a cause, and others produced by the seasons. Tell me, 
is there anything that does not fall under any of these 
three heads ? ” “ Yes, there are two such things, space 

and nirvana.” 3 Buddha has not left any clear account 
of the world of becoming. Ever so many suggestions are 
made, and they are all developed in a one-sided manner 


1 Katha-'atthu (translated by Aung and Mrs. Rhys Davids under the 
title of Points of Controversy) mentions among the unconditioned reals, space, 
nirvana and the four truths. 

* Pigha Nikaya, 207. 


! Milinda, iv. 



382 


INDIAN PHILOSOPHY 


by the later schools of Buddhism. Nagasena takes up a 
very subjective attitude. To him a thing is nothing but 
the complex of its characters. There is nothing real in 
the body apart from fleeting sensations. Things are only 
mental symbols for complexes of sensations. One of the 
four schools contends that matter is the phantasn?«J play 
of the phenomena of mind. Another, that mind is all. A 
third holds to the philosophy of the void or sunyavada, 
and urges that the world is neither real nor unreal, nor 
both nor neither. Buddha did not feel called upon to 
solve the problem of external reality ; to him it was enough 
to note that man stands helpless in the middle of the 
stream of becoming, which he can neither check nor con- 
trol ; that he is bound to toss about in the dark unfathom- 
able depths of samsara so long as he is possessed by the 
thirst for life ; and that in this restless world there is no 
possibility of peace. “It is not the time to discuss about 
fire, for those who are actually in burning fire, but it is 
the time to escape from it.” * 


X 

The Individual Self 

The dualism of body and mind is a part of becoming, 
a distinction of aspects in a whole ; for all things are 
related to each other as aspects of one continuous evolu- 
tion. While life is eternal it is not always bound up with 
consciousness. Any point in the universe becomes a point 
of reference in relation to which all other things in the 
universe may be conceived to be in motion, and when such 
a point of reference is also conscious, we call it an indivi- 
dual subject. Perception of the truth of things requires 
subjective centres. 

The individual subject is the empirical life of man, which 
grows and changes. The Upanisads declare emphatically 
that the true self of man is not to be identified with the 
body or the mental life which grows. Yet the union of 
mental and material qualities makes the individual. Every 
■ Majjhima Nikaya, vol. i., p. 29. 



ETHICAL IDEALISM OF BUDDHISM 383 


person as every thing is a synthesis, a compound. The 
Buddhists call it a samskara, an organisation. In all 
individuals, without exception, the relation of the com- 
ponent parts to one another is ever changing. It is never 
the same for two consecutive moments. Man is a living 
continuous complex, which does not remain the same for 
two moments, and yet continues in an endless number of 
existences without being completely different from itself. 1 
While both mind and body are in ceaseless change, imper- 
manence is more marked and the flow more rapid in mind 
than in body, so that if we wish to speak of anything as 
permanent it must be rather of body than of mind. 2 3 4 

Individuality is an unstable state of being which is 
ever growing. Rhys Davids says : “ There can be no 
individuality without putting together, there can be no 
putting together, no confection, without a becoming ; 
there can be no becoming without a becoming different ; 
and there can be no becoming different without a dissolu- 
tion, a passing away, which sooner or later will be inevi- 
tably complete.” 3 It is a perpetual process with nothing 
permanent. Nothing here is permanent, neither name 
nor form. 4 To the five ascetics of Isipatana in Benares, 
headed by Kondanna, the second sermon was delivered on 
the non-existence of the soul : “ The body is not the eternal 
soul, for it tends towards destruction. Nor do feeling, 
perception, disposition and intelligence together con- 
stitute the eternal soul, for were it so, it would not be the 
case that consciousness likewise tends towards destruction.” 
“ Our form, feeling, perception, disposition and in- 
telligence are all transitory, and therefore evil, and not 
permanent and good. That which is transitory, evil and 
liable to change, is not the eternal soul. So it must be 

1 See Mahaniddesa, p. 117 ; Visuddhimagga, viii ; W.B.T., p. 150. 

1 Samyutta Nikaya, ii. 94 and 95. According to the great text of the 
Hinayana Abhidharinamahavibhasasastra, a day of twenty-four hours 
contains six thousand four hundred millions ninety-nine thousand nine 
hundred and eight}' ksanas or moments, and the five skandhas are repeatedly 
produced and destroyed in every ksana. (See Yamakami Sogea : Systems 
0 / Buddhistic Thought, p. 11.) 

3 The Religious Systems of the World, p. 142. 

4 Mahavagga, i. vi. 38 fi. 



384 INDIAN PHILOSOPHY 

said of all physical forms whatsoever, past, present, or to 
be, subjective or objective, far or near, high or low : “ this 
is not mine, this I am not, this is not my eternal soul.” 1 
Dhammadinna in Veddallasutta says : “ The ignorant 

unconverted man regards the self as bodily form, or as 
something having a bodily form, or bodily form as being in 
the self, or the self as being in the bodily form ; or else he 
regards the self as feeling, or as something having feeling, 
or feeling as being in the self, or the self as being in the 
feeling.” The argument is repeated with the other skandhas. 
There is no self (or Atman) or person (pudgala) or living 
being (sattva) or principle of life (jiva) which is permanent. 
We have no consciousness of any such changeless entity 
or eternal principle in man. 2 We have only linkages of 
causes and effects. Man seems to be a complex composed 
of five skandhas. The theory of the skandhas is developed 
out of the namarupa of the Upanisads. Here our point 
is that besides constituent elements, rupa (the material) 
and nama (the mental), we seem to have nothing more. 

In the Surangama Sutta, Ananda’s pitiful attempts to 
locate the soul inside the body or outside it, behind the 
sense organs, etc., are discussed.3 We search in vain for a 
permanent soul in the substance of the brain, or the relics 
of sense, or the constituents of individuality. The postu- 
lation of an unconnected force called the soul seemed to 
the Buddhists to go against the law of karma, for people 
look upon the soul as a sort of jack-in-the-box, somehow 
the chief agent of all activities. According to Mrs. Rhys 
Davids : “ The anti-atta argument of Buddhism is mainly 
and consistently directed against the notion of a soul, 
which was not only a persistent unchanging, blissful trans- 
migrating superphenomenal being, but was also a being 
wherein the supreme Atman or world soul was immanent, 
one with it, in essence and as a bodily or mental factor 
issuing its fiat.” 4 The Atman of the Upanisads is, how- 
ever, not the transmigrating self. Another misconception 

1 Mahavagga, i. 21. * See Samyutta Nikaya, iv. 54. 

J Western psychologists indulge in such attempts to locate the soul 
in the body, nervous system, brain, and a particular point in it. 

* Buddhist Psychology, p. 31. 



ETHICAL IDEALISM OF BUDDHISM 385 


of the Upanifad definition of the soul repudiated by 
Buddha is that which regards the Atman as an abstract 
unity excluding all differences. If it is so, it is certainly 
a nonentity, as Indra said long ago. 

A different reason which led Buddha to be silent about 
the soul was the conviction that the master instinct to 
affirm the ordinary self is the hidden root of all spiritual 
evil. He repudiates the popular delusion of the individual 
ego and disputes the reality of the surface self. He is 
emphatic about the false views of self. The objects with 
which we identify ourselves are not the true self. “ Since 
neither self nor aught belonging to self, brethren, can 
really and truly be accepted, is not the heretical position 
which holds : ‘ this is the world and this is the self, and I 
shall continue to be in the future, permanent, immutable, 
eternal, of a nature that knows no change, yea, I shall 
abide to eternity,’ is not this simply and entirely a doctrine 
of fools ? ” 1 It is the false view that clamours for the 
perpetual continuance of the small self that Buddha refutes. 
We never remain the same for two moments together, 
and for what self is it then that we desire everlasting con- 
tinuance ? 1 Buddha repudiates the animism which pro- 
jects a self into every object. He denies the existence of 
the unknown substratum which some posit as the support 
of qualities, since its nature is hidden from us. This use- 
less occult, unknown and unknowable substance, Buddha 
rightly denies. Sometimes the liberated soul is conceived 
after the analogy of the human being. In his early 
wanderings Buddha approached the renowned sage Alara 
Kalama and became his disciple, learning the successive 
degrees of ecstatic meditation. Alara taught the view 
that the individual soul when it abolishes itself is set free. 
“ Having abolished himself by himself, he sees that naught 
exists, and is called a nihilist ; then, like a bird from its 
cage, the soul escaping from the body is declared to be 
set free ; this is that supreme Brahman constant, eternal, 
and without distinctive signs, which the wise who know 
reality declare to be liberation.” Buddha objected to this 

1 Majjhima. NiVaya, i. 13^. Cf iii. 27. 

1 See Inge : Proceedings of the Aristotelian Society, vol. xix. p. 2S4. 



386 INDIAN PHILOSOPHY 

doctrine on the ground that the liberated soul was still a 
soul ; whatever the condition it attained be, it was subject 
to rebirth, and the “ absolute attainment of our end is 
only to be found in the abandonment of everything.” 
Buddha clearly tells us what the self is not, though 
does not give any clear account of what it is. It is, how- 
ever, wrong to think that there is no self at all according 
to Buddha. “ Then the wandering monk Vacchagotta 
spake to the Exalted One, saying : ‘ How does the matter 
stand, venerable Gotama, is there the ego ? ’ When he 
said this, the Exalted One was silent. ‘ How then, vene- 
rable Gotama, is there not the ego ? ’ And still the 
Exalted One maintained silence. Then the wandering 
monk Vacchagotta rose from his seat and went away. 
But the venerable Ananda said to the Exalted One : 
‘ Wherefore, sire, has the Exalted One not given an answer 
to the questions put by the wandeiing monk Vacchagotta ?’ 
‘ If I, Ananda, when the wandering monk Vacchagotta 
asked me : “Is there the ego,” had answered : “ The ego 
is,” then that, Ananda, would have confirmed the doctxine 
of the Samanas and Brahmanas who believe in permanence. 
If I, Ananda, when the wandering monk Vacchagotta asked 
me : “Is there not the ego ? ” had answered : " The ego is 
not,” then that, Ananda, would have confirmed the doctrine 
of the Samanas and the Brahmanas, who believe in annihila- 
tion.’ ” About this dialogue Oldenberg remarks : “ If Buddha 
avoids the negation of the existence of the ego, he does 
so in order not to shock a weak-minded hearer. Through 
the shirking of the question as to the existence or non- 
existence of the ego is heard the answer to which the 
premises of the Buddhist teaching tended, the ego is not.” 1 
We cannot agree with this view that Buddha deliberately 
disguised the truth. Were Oldenberg correct, then nir vana, 
would mean annihilation, which Buddha repudiates. Nirvana 
is not a lapse into a void, but only a negation of the flux 
and a positive return of the self to itself. The logical con- 
clusion from this would be that something is, though it is 
not the empirical self. This is also in agreement with 
Buddha’s statement that the self is neither the same as 

* Luddha, p. 273. 



ETHICAL IDEALISM OF BUDDHISM 387 


nor entirely different from the skandhas. It is not a mere 
composite of mind and body, nor is it the eternal substance, 
exempt from the vicissitudes of change . 1 The discussion 
of the burden and its bearer makes out that the skandhas 
which are the burden and the pudgala which is the bearer 
are distinct entities. If they were identical, there is no 
need to distinguish between them. “ O, ye mendicants, I 
am going to point out to you the burden as well as the carrier 
of the burden : the five states are the burden and the pudgala 
is the carrier of the burden ; he who holds that there is no 
soul is a man with false notions.” 1 To be born is to take 
up the burden; to lay it down is to attain bliss or 
nirvana. 

Buddha emphasises the fact that we transcend experi- 
ence when we make assertions about the permanent soul 
behind phenomena. While agreeing with the Upanisads 
that the world of origination, decease, and suffering is not 
the true refuge of the soul, Buddha is silent about the 
Atman enunciated in the Upanisads. He neither affirms 
nor denies its existence. For so long as we swear by dry 
logic we cannot prove the reality of the soul as Atman. 
The unknowable Atman said to underlie our self is an 
inscrutable mystery. Some say it is, and it is open to 
others to say that it is not. Buddha exhorts us to be 
philosophical enough to recognise the limits of philosophy. 
A true psychology is possible only if we repudiate the 
metaphysical bias in favour of or against the soul. The 
psychologists of the middle of the nineteenth century 
tried to discuss psychological problems in the spirit of 
Buddha, even as physicists and biologists deal with their 
subject matter without defining matter or life. Buddha 
contents himself with a description of psychical phenomena, 
and does not venture to put forth any theory of the soul. 
Rational psychologists attempt to describe the nature of 

1 In Puggalapaiinatti we have a discussion of three principal theories 
regarding the nature of Atman : ^asvatavada, which holds that the soul 
truly exists in this life and the future ; the Ucchedavada, that the soul truly 
exists only in this life ; and the third theory that the soul does not exist 
m this life or the next. 

1 W.B.T., p. 161; Sarvabhisamayasutra quoted in Uddyotakara’s Nyaya- 
varttika, iii. I. i. 


VOL. I 


13 * 



388 INDIAN PHILOSOPHY 

the soul, its finiteness or otherwise . 1 To posit a soul seemed 
to Buddha to step beyond the descriptive standpoint. 
What we know is the phenomenal self. Buddha knows 
that there is something else. He is never willing to admit 
that the soul is only a combination of elements, but he 
refuses to speculate on what else it may be. 

The Upanisads arrive at the ground of all things by 
stripping the self of veil after veil of contingency. At 
the end of the process they find the universal self which 
is none of these finite entities, though the ground of them 
all. Buddha holds the same view, though he does not 
state it definitely. He denies the immortality of the fleet- 
ing elements which constitute the complex empirical indi- 
vidual. He denies the unphilosopliical or the theological 
view sometimes put forward in the Upanisads that the 
Atman is of the size of a thumb, which is said to escape 
from the body at death through an aperture in the suture 

' The difference between the two positions is brought out in the follow- 
ing passage from one of our greatest living psychologists. Professor Stout : 
" It is a fact recognised explicitly or implicitly by everyone that the mani- 
fold and constantly changing experiences that enter into the life history 
of an individual mind are in some sense owned by a self or ego which remains 
one and the same throughout their vicissitudes. But when we begin to 
inquire into the precise nature of the unity and identity ascribed to the 
self and the precise sense in which its experiences belong to it, we are con- 
fronted with a fundamental divergence of views. On the one hand it is 
maintained that, just as the unity of a triangle, or of a melody, or of an 
organism consists merely in the special mode in which its parts are connected 
and correlated so as to form a specific kind of complex, so the unity of what 
we call an individual mind consists merely in the peculiar way in which 
what we call its experiences are united with each other. On this view, when 
we say that a desire is someone's desire we merely mean that it enters as 
one constituent among others into a connected totality of experiences, having 
a certain sort of unity and continuity which can belong to experiences only 
and not to material things. In opposition to this doctrine, it is strenuously 
maintained by others that the identical subject is not merely the unified 
complex of experience but the distinct principle from which they derive 
their unity, a something which persists through them and links them 
together. According to these writers it is an inversion of the truth to say 
that the manifold experiences through their union with each other form a 
single self. On the contrary, it is only through their relation to the single 
self as a common centre that they are united with each other. Of these 
two conincting theories 1 feel bound to accept the first and reject the second. 
The unity of the self seems to me indistinguishable from the unity of the 
total complex of its experiences." [borne Fundamental Faints in the theory 
of Knowledge, p. 6.) 



ETHICAL IDEALISM OF BUDDHISM 389 


of the skull. He also allows that the subject self is inde- 
monstrable. Our introspection cannot seize it, yet we 
must assume it, for it is the subject that sees all else. With- 
out it we cannot account for even the empirical self. Train 
of ideas, bundle, heap, collection are all metaphors, and 
involve a unifying agency. Without this immanent principle 
the life of man becomes inexplicable. So Buddha con- 
sistently refuses to deny the reality of the soul. Ancient 
Buddhist thinkers noticed this apparently uncertain atti- 
tude of Buddha towards the question of the self, and some 
have held that Buddha taught from motives of expediency 
both the existence and the non-existence of the self. 

Nagarjuna, in his commentary on the Prajnaparamita 
Sutra, says : “ The Tathagata sometimes taught that the 
Atman exists, and at other times he taught that the Atman 
does not exist. When he preached that the Atman exists 
and is to be the receiver of misery or happiness in the 
successive lives as the reward of its own karma, his object 
was to save men from falling into the heresy of nihilism 
(ucchedavada). When he taught that there is no Atman 
in the sense of a creator or a perceiver or an absolutely 
free agent, apart from the conventional name given to the 
aggregate of the five skandhas, his object was to save men 
from falling into the opposite heresy of eternalism (sasva- 
tavada). Now, which of these two views represents the 
truth ? It is doubtless the doctrine of the denial of Atman. 
This doctrine, which is so difficult to understand, was not 
intended by Buddha for the ears of those whose intellect 
is dull and in whom the root of goodness has not thriven. 
And why ? Because such men, by hearing the doctrine of 
an-Atman, would have been sure to fall into the heresy of 
nihilism. The two doctrines were preached by Buddha 
for two very different objects. He taught the existence of 
Atman when he wanted to impart to his hearers the con- 
ventional doctrine ; he taught the doctrine of an-Atman 
when he wanted to impart to them the transcendental 
doctrine.” 1 

1 Similarly, Dharmapalacarya says in bis commentary on the Vijfiana- 
matrasastra : “ The existence of the Atman and of the dharmas, i.e. of 
the ego and of the phenomenal world, is affirmed in the sacred canon only 



390 


INDIAN PHILOSOPHY 


XI 

Nagasena’s Theory of Self 

When we pass from the direct teaching of Buddha to 
its interpretation by Nagasena and Buddhaghosa a nega- 
tive complexion is cast over the silence or the agnosticism 
of the original teaching of Buddha. Buddhist thought is 
torn away from its ancestral stem and planted in a purely 
rational soil. The logical results of the philosophy of 
becoming are drawn out with rigour. Phenomenalistic 
doctrines which remind us of Hume are developed with 
great skill and brilliance. Buddha makes psychology the 
fundamental discipline from and through which meta- 
physical problems are to be approached. Our attention 
according to him should shift from the absolute mind of 
metaphysical speculation to the human mind of psycho- 
logical observation. Human consciousness apparently is the 
playground of rising and vanishing ideas. With his eye 
for the continual change and movement of ideas and con- 
sciousness and insistence on the exact method of psycho- 
logical observation, Nagasena dismisses the immortal soul 
as an illegitimate abstraction, and reduces the self of man 
to a unified complex exhibiting an unbroken historical 
continuity. In him, therefore, the negative position of the 
non-existence of the soul is explicitly affirmed. He even 
goes to the length of saying that his designation Nagasena 
indicates nothing permanent . 1 Things are names, con- 
cepts perhaps. Chariot is a name as much as Nagasena. 
There is nothing beneath the properties more real. The 

provisionally and hypothetically, and never in the sense of their possessing 
a real and permanent nature.” Aryadeva, too, the most prominent of 
Kagarjuna's disciples, says in his commentary on the Madhyamikasastra : 
" The Buddhas, in their omniscience, watch the natures of all living beings 
and preach to them the Good Law in different ways, sometimes affirming 
the existence of the Atman and at other times denying it. Without an 
adequate development of one’s intellectual powers, no one can attain 
nirvana, nor can one know why evil should be eschewed. It is for the 
people who have not reached this stage that the Buddhas preach the 
existence of Atman." (See Yamakami Sogen : Systems of Buddhistic 
Thought, pp. 19—20.) 

* Milmda, li. i. i. 



ETHICAL IDEALISM OF BUDDHISM 391 


immediate data of consciousness do not bear out the 
existence of any unity which we can imagine. 

" And Milinda began by asking, ‘ How is your Reverence known, 
and what, sir, is your name ? ’ 

“ ‘ I am known as Nagasena, O king, and it is by that name that 
my brethren in the faith address me, yet this is only a generally under- 
stood term, a designation in common use. For there is no permanent 
individuality (no soul) involved in the matter.’ 

“ Then Milinda called upon the Yonakas and the brethren to 
witness : ‘ This Nagasena says there is no permanent individuality 
(no soul) implied in his name. Is it now even possible to approve 
him in that ? ’ And turning to Nagasena, he said : ' If there be no 
permanent individuality (no soul) involved in the matter, who is it, 
pray, that gives to you members of the Order your robes and food and 
lodging and necessaries for the sick ? Who is it that enjoys such 
things when given ? Who is it that lives a life of righteousness ? 
Who is it who devotes himself to meditation ? Who is it who attains 
to the goal of the Excellent Way, to the nirvana of Arhatship ? And 
who is it who destroys living creatures ? Who is it who takes what 
is not his own ? Who is it who lives an evil life of worldly lusts, who 
speaks lies, who drinks strong drink, who (in a word) commits any one 
of the five sins which work out their bitter fruit even in this life ? 
If that be so, there is neither merit nor demerit ; there is neither 
doer nor causer of good or evil deeds ; there is neither fruit nor result 
of good or evil karma. If, most reverend Nagasena, we are to think 
that were a man to kill you there would be no murder, then it follows 
that there are no real masters or teachers in your Order, and that your 
ordinations are void. . . . You tell me that your brethren in the 
Order are in the habit of addressing you as Nagasena. Now what is 
that Nagasena ? Do you mean to say that the hair is Nagasena ? ' 

" ' I don’t say that, great king.’ 

“ ‘ Or the hairs on the body, perhaps ? ’ 

Certainly not.’ 

“ ‘ Or is it the nails, the teeth, the skin, the flesh, the nerves, or the 
brain, or any or all of these, that is Nagasena ? ’ 

" And to each of these he answered no. 

" ‘ Is it the outward form then (rupa) that is Nagasena, or the 
sensations (vedana), or the ideas (samjna), or the syntheses, the con- 
stituent elements of character (samskara), or the consciousness 
(vijnana) that is Nagasena ? ’ 

“ And to each of these he answered no. 

" ' Then is it all these skandhas combined that are Nagasena ? ' 

" ‘ No, great king.’ 

" ‘But is there anything outside the five skandhas that is Naga- 
sena ? ’ 

“ And stdl he answered no. 



392 


INDIAN PHILOSOPHY 


“ ‘ Then thus, ask as I may, I can discover no Nagasena. Nagasena 
is a mere empty sound. Who then is the Nagasena that we see before 
us ? ' 

“ And the venerable Nagasena asked Milinda the king : ‘ Did 

your Majesty come here on foot, or in a chariot ? 

“ ‘ I did not come on foot ; I came in a chariot.’ 

" ‘ Then if you came, sire, in a chariot, explain to me what that 
is. Is it the pole that is the chariot ? ’ 

“ * I did not say that.’ 

" ‘ Is it the axle that is the chariot ? ' 

“ * Certainly not.’ 

“ ' Is it the wheels, or the framework, or the ropes, or the yoke, ©x 
the spokes of the wheels, or the goad, that are the chariot ? ’ 

" And to all these he still answered no. 

“ ‘ Then is it all these parts of it that are the chariot ? * 

" * No, sir.’ 

" ' But is there anything outside them that is the chariot ? 

" And still he answered no. 

“ ' Then thus, ask as I may, I can discover no chariot. Chariot 
is a mere empty sound. What then is the chariot you say you came 
in ? ’ And he called upon the Yonakas and the brethren to witness, 
saying : ' Milinda the king here has said that he came in a chariot. 
But when asked in that case to explain what the chariot was, he is 
unable to establish what he averred. Is it, forsooth, possible to 
approve him in that ? ’ 

“ And Milinda said : ' I have spoken no untruth, reverend sir. It 
is on account of its having all these things — the pole and the axle, 
the wheels and the framework, the ropes and the yoke, the spokes and 
the goad — that it comes under the generally understood term, the 
designation in common use, of " chariot.” ’ 

“ ‘ Very good. Your Majesty has rightly grasped the meaning of 
" chariot.” And just so it is on account of all those tilings you ques- 
tioned me about, the thirty-two kinds of organic matter in a human 
body, and the five constituent elements of being — that I come under the 
generally understood term, the designation m common use, of “ Naga- 
sena.’' For it was said, sire, by our Sister Vagira in the presence 
of the Blessed One : “ Just as it is by the condition precedent of the 
co-existence of its various parts that the word ' chariot ’ is used, just 
so is it that when the skandhas are there we talk of a ’being.’”’ ” 1 

From the silence of Buddha on the question of the “soul,” 
Nagasena drew his negative inference that there was no 
soul. The word self is dropped altogether, and only states 
of self are spoken of. The self is a stream of ideas. The 
several states of self possess a common character, and we 
abstract this common element and call it the self or Atman. 

1 Milinda, n. i. i. 



ETHICAL IDEALISM OF BUDDHISM 393 


If it is argued that there is such a thing as consciousness 
of self or the intuition of self, the Buddhists reply that it 
is a psychological impossibility. As when we deal with 
things like chariot, etc., we imagine something underlying 
the properties, even so do we unjustly imagine a soul 
underlying mental states. / The idea of a soul when analysed 
comes to this, that certakn qualities exist together. As 
body is a name for a system of qualities, even so soul is a 
name for the sum of the states which constitute our 
mental existence . 1 Without the qualities there is no soul, 
as there is no river without the two banks, the water and 
the sand, and no chariot without the wheels, the poles, 
the axle and the body.* 

Nagasena recognises the distinction between thoughts 
and things. In every individual he admits there are nama 
and rupa, mind and body. Only mind is not a permanent 
self any more than body is a permanent substance. Ideas, 
states, modifications come and go, attract us for a while, 
occupy our attention, and then disappear. We imagine 
that there is a permanent self which binds all our states 
and preserves them all, but this assumption is not justified 
by actual experience. ; In the manner of Hume he argues 
that we do not find anywhere in our experience anything 
answering to the conception of self. We do not perceive 
anything simple and continuous. Any idea which has no 
corresponding impression is an unreality. Things are what 
they are perceived to be. ) “ For my part, when I enter 
most intimately into what ' I call myself, I always stumble 
on some particular perception or other, of heat or cold, 
light or shade, love or hatred, pain or pleasure. I never 
can catch myself at any time without a perception and 
never can observe anything but the perception. When 

1 ** The very existence of ideas constitutes the soul,” according to 
Berkeley, though this does not represent his later view. (Works, vol. iv. t 
P- 434-) 

J The Bodhisattva said to a pilgrim : “ Will you have a drink of Ganges 
water fragrant with the scent of the forest ? ” The pilgrim gives the answer 
back in the words : ” What is the Ganges ? Is the sand the Ganges ? Is 
the water the Ganges ? Is the nether bank the Ganges ? Is the further 
bank the Ganges ? ” The Bodhisattva retorted : ” If you except the water, 
the sand, the hither bank and the further bank, where can you find any 
Ganges ? * (Jdiaka Tales, No. 244 .) 



394 


INDIAN PHILOSOPHY 


my perceptions are removed for any time as by sound 
sleep, so long am I insensible of myself, and may truly be 
said not to exist. And were all my perceptions removed 
by death, and could I neither think nor feel, nor see, nor 
love, not hate, after the dissolution of my body, I should 
be entirely annihilated, nor do I conceive what is further 
requisite to make me a perfect nonentity. If any one, 
upon serious and unprejudiced reflection, thinks he has a 
different notion of himself, I must confess I can reason no 
longer with him. All I can allow him is, that he may be 
in the right as well as I, and that we are essentially 
different in this particular. He may, perhaps, perceive 
something simple and continued which he calls himself, 
though I am certain there is no such principle in me. 
But setting aside some metaphysicians of this kind, I 
venture to affirm of the rest of mankind that they are 
nothing but a bundle or collection of different perceptions, 
which succeed each other with an inconceivable rapidity, 
and are in a perpetual flux and movement. Our eyes 
cannot turn in their sockets without varying our percep- 
tions. Our thought is still more variable than our sight, 
and all our other senses and faculties contribute to this 
change ; nor is there any single power of the soul which 
remains unalterably the same, perhaps for one moment.” 1 
Again, a little further on, Hume writes : “ What we call 
mind is nothing but a heap or bundle of different percep- 
tions united together by certain relations, and supposed, 
though falsely, to be endowed with a certain simplicity and 
identity.” Nagasena, like Hume, feels himself to be under 
an intellectual obligation to regard all terms as jargon to 
which no imaginable meaning could be attached, and so is 
obliged to dispense with the subtle soul which to him 
expresses an impossible meaning. What is not felt is not 
real. We know only that there is suffering, but not that 
there is a subject that suffers . 1 Nagasena rightly says that 


1 Hume’s Works, vol. i„ pp. 3 fi. 

* M. Taine remarks : " There is nothing in ego except the train of its 
events.” Soul, according to Voltaire, is a " vague, indefinite term for an 
unknown principle of effects, known and felt by us, which has generally been 
taken for the origin or cause of life, or for life itself.” 



ETHICAL IDEALISM OF BUDDHISM 395 


he does not know the self substance, that in which the 
qualities inhere according to Descartes, the unknown sup- 
port of Locke. We have no idea of it, and we cannot pre- 
sume to give any intelligible account of its relation to the 
qualities which it is supposed to support. ') Modern psy- 
chology has made the expression psychology without a 
soul, first used by Lange, current coin, and admits that 
soul is only a label attached to the bundle of sensations, 
emotions and sentiments. William James considers the 
term soul to be a mere figure of speech to which no 
reality corresponds. “ The word explains nothing and 
guarantees nothing, its successive thoughts are the only 
intelligible things about it.” Some realists who approach 
the problems of philosophy in the scientific spirit of early 
Buddhism do not accept the theory of the soul . 1 The 
notion of an inner principle different from and mysteriously 
related to outer responses is considered a superstition. 
Non-empirical explanatory essences are all eliminated. Self, 
then, is a generic idea standing for a collection of mental 
states. It is a sum total of conscious contents . 2 Nagasena 
is perfectly logical. If we do not, with Plato, hold that 
behind every individual being like chariot there is a uni- 
versal lurking, we need not think that the complex man 
has a self behind him. 

If sense is for us the measure of the universe, then experi- 
ence becomes the feeling of each moment. Self is nothing 
more than an isolated momentary perception. The life of 
self, or what we popularly call mind, lasts only so long as 
the indivisible, momentary consciousness lasts.' Accord- 
ing to William James, the pulse of the present moment is 
the real subject. “ Consciousness may be represented as 
a stream. . . Things which are known together are 


1 Perry: Philosophical Tendencies, pp. 271 fi. 

* It is said in Visuddhimagga : " Just as the word chariot is but a mode 
of expression for axle, wheels and other constituent members, placed in a 
certain relation to each other, but when we come to examine the members 
one by one, we discover that in an absolute sense there is no chariot ; just 
as the words house, fist, lute, army, city, tree, are only modes of expression 
for collections of certain things disposed in a certain manner, in exactly 
the same way the words living being and ego are only modes of expression 
for a complex of bodily and non-bodily constituents.” 



390 


INDIAN PHILOSOPHY 


known in single pulses of that stream.” The real subject 
“ is not an enduring being ; each subject lasts but for a 
moment. Its place is immediately taken by another which 
exercises its function, that is, to act as the medium of unity. 
The subject for the time being knows and adopts its pre- 
decessor, and by so doing appropriates what its predecessor 
adopted.” 1 The self logically becomes a transitory state 
of consciousness. Each conscious phenomenon called the 
mind is not a modification of any eternal mind stuff or 
the appearance of an Atman, but only a highly complex 
compound constantly changing and giving rise to new 
combinations. On this view we cannot account for the 
relative permanence and unity of experience. Bertrand 
Russell states that there is an empirically given relation 
between two experiences which constitutes their being 
what is commonly called experiences of the same person, 
and we might therefore regard the person simply as the 
particular series of experiences between which this relation 
holds, dispensing with him altogether as a metaphysical 
entity. There is continuity, but no identity. The con- 
sciousness of two successive moments have no substantial 
identity; What is felt in the previous moment is already 
dead and gone, and even as we think our experiences flit 
away. Each state is an isolated individual, appearing for 
a moment and immediately vanishing, giving place to 
another, which has a similar fate. The impression of con- 
tinuity is produced by the close crowding in of impres- 
sions, even as the continuity of a circumference is made 
up of a number of small points. Russell is of opinion 
that each of us is not one man but an infinite series of men, 
of whom each exists just for one moment. In successive 
states of consciousness we are different beings, and even 
continuity of existence between them is hard to compre- 
hend. When the one is present, the other is irrevocably 
dead and gone. How can even the past condition the 
present ? 1 The emphasis on the continuity as well as the 


* Principles of Psychology . 

* In the very useful introductory essay Mr. Aung has prefixed to his 

translation of Anuruddha’s Abh'dhammattha-Safigaha, he sums up Ani- 
ruddha’s explanation of the phenomenon of memory in tlmse words : Each 



ETHICAL IDEALISM OF BUDDHISM 397 


transitoriness of mental states seems to be inconsistent. 
The persistence of the past in the present involved in the 
law of karma is not accounted for. 

/The mysterious soul refuses to be eliminated. Acts of 
perception and memory become impossible without it. 
We cannot rightly define a perception and cannot know 
even that consciousness is a succession. If mind is only 
successive perceptions, there is nothing that perceives. 
One perception cannot perceive another, j The greatest 
contribution of Kant to modern thought is the principle 
that the different kinds of empirical consciousness must be 
connected in one self-consciousness. This is the basis of 
all knowledge, whether of ourselves as individuals or of the 
world as systematically connected according to law. Know- 
ledge implies the determination of the successive feelings 
by a subject not in the succession. Without the synthesis 
of self, experience would remain a mere rhapsody of dis- 
tinct perceptions and would never become knowledge. An 
experience in which we have only feelings one after another 
is not an experience of objects at all. This central truth 
of all idealism was enunciated in unambiguous terms some 
centuries before Kant by the great Indian philosopher 
Samkara. Samkara criticises the doctrine of momentariness 
or ksanikavada in his commentary on the Vedanta 
Sutras . 1 He argues that our consciousness cannot be 
momentary since it belongs to a permanent individual. If 
an individual does not exist, then recognition and memory 


mental state is related to the next in at least four different modes of rela- 
tion (paccaya) : proximity (anantara), contiguity (samanantara) , absence 
(n'atthi) and abeyance (avigata). This fourfold correlation is understood 
to mean that each expired state renders service (upakara) to the next. In 
other words, each, on passing away, gives up the whole of its energy (paccaya- 
satti) to its successor. Each successor, therefore, has all the potentialities 
of its predecessors and more. This being so, the mental element or the 
principle of recognition or perception (sanna) in each of the mental states 
that take part in a memory process, with all its heritage of the past, is a 
recognising under favourable circumstances, in the image reproduced or 
the idea revived of the original object by the very marks which were observed 
by its predecessors in a certain intuition or reflection. Thus the subject 
has come to regard the image as the copy, and the idea as the counterpart 
of the original object intuited or reflected upon ” (p. 14). 

1 ii. 2. ia-32. 



398 INDIAN PHILOSOPHY 

become unintelligible. If it is said that these phenomena 
do not require a permanent individual, for what happens 
at one moment may be recalled at another distinct moment, 
even as we recollect to-day what we did yesterday, 
Samkara says, then our judgments would always remain. 
“ I remember that somebody did something yesterday,” 
and not as they actually run, “ I remember that I did a 
particular thing yesterday.” It may be said that the 
consciousness of identity is illusory, for between a momentary 
cognition of yesterday and another such cognition of to-day 
there is a similarity which we wrongly interpret as an 
identity of the perceiving consciousness. But such an 
argument will not hold, since we cannot make a judgment 
of similarity if there are not two things, and if the momentari- 
ness doctrine is true, we cannot admit the existence of two 
things. It follows that we must admit the permanence of 
the perceiving consciousness, since there is no other way in 
which the past cognition and the present may be held 
together and compared, so that a judgment of similarity 
may result. If the past is to be recognised in the present, 
the permanence of the percipient is necessary. Even if 
such recognition be admitted to be based on similarity, 
the recognition of the similarity itself requires the identity 
of the subject. Again, we cannot admit that the judgment 
of similarity explains everything. When I say I recognise 
the man I met yesterday, I do not mean that my cogni- 
tion is similar to the cognition of the previous day’s, but 
that the objects of the two are identical. Mere similarity 
is inadequate to explain the experience of recognition. 
Besides, there is no possibility of doubting our own selves. 
Even if I doubt whether what I see to-day is the same as 
what I saw yesterday, I never doubt whether I that see 
something to-day am the same self that saw something 
yesterday. Thus Samkara argues against the momentari- 
ness view as applied to the perceiving subject, and contends 
that without a subject no synthesis, no knowledge, no 
recognition is possible . 1 

j Nagasena did not raise the question of knowledge and 
so evaded these problems. Otherwise he would have 
« Commentary on, ii. a. 25. 



ETHICAL IDEALISM OF BUDDHISM 399 


realised that the two terms subject and object, between 
which the knowledge relation holds, cannot stand for the 
same thing. 


XII 

Psychology 

Whatever may be the view of the metaphysical reality 
of the soul, the Buddhists as a class attempt to deal with 
the individual life without any reference to a permanent 
self, for even if it has any meaning it seems to be too 
recondite to be of any service to us. We have now to 
notice the Buddhist analysis of the self. “ When one says 
‘ I,’ what he does is that he refers either to all the skandhas 
combined or any one of them, and deludes himself that that 
was ‘ I.’ ” 1 The being which undergoes existence is a com- 
posite one formed of skandhas or aggregates, which are five 
in number for human beings and fewer for others. The 
mind has the unity of a system. 2 It is a composite of mental 
forces. 

The elements of individuality are distinguished into 
two broad divisions, nama and rupa. Even in the Upani- 
sads these constitute the phenomenal self. Through them 
the pure being of Brahman is spread out in the objective 
sphere. Nama answers to the mental and rupa to the 
physical factors. 3 Body and mind are viewed as mutually 
dependent ; “ whatever is gross is form or rupa ; whatever 
is subtle is nama. The two are connected one with the 
other, and therefore they spring into being together. As a 
hen does not get a yoke or an egg shell separately but 
both arise in one, the two being intimately dependent one 
on the other ; just so, if there were no nama, there would 
be no form. What is meant by nama in that expression 

1 Samyutta Nikaya, iii. 130. 

1 Dr. McDougall writes : “ We may fairly define a mind as an organised 
system of mental or purposive forces." — ( Psychology .) 

3 “ It is called rupam because it manifests, rupyati” (Samyutta Xikaya, 
iii. 86). What reveals itself to the senses is called rupam. It is used to refer 
to matter and material qualities, objects perceived, and what Mrs. Rhys 
Davids calls “ realms of attenuated matter." See her Editorial Note in 
Buddhaghosa’s Atthasalini, E.T. See also W.B.T., pp. 184 ff , where it is made 
to include the four elements, the body, the senses, and even the sensations. 



400 


INDIAN PHILOSOPHY 


being intimately dependent on what is meant by form, 
they spring up together. And this is, through time imme- 
morial, their nature.” 1 The Buddhists, along with Indian 
psychologists in general, believe in the material or organic 
nature of mind or manas. 

As to the distinction between the outer and the inner, 
the objective and the subjective, the following passage is 
pertinent : “ Which are the states which are ajjhatta 

(personal, subjective, internal) ? Those states which for 
this or that being, related to the self, to the individual, 
to one’s own, are referred to the person . . . and w’hich 
are the states that are bahiddha (non-personal, objective 
and external) ? Those states which for this or that other 
being, for other individuals, related to the self, to the indi- 
vidual, to one’s own, are referable to the person.” All 
are dharmas or mental presentations, ideas in Locke’s 
sense, whatever is the immediate object of perception, 
thought or understanding. The individuality of man, con- 
sisting of both rupa and nama, body and mind, is said to 
be a congeries of mental states. In Book I of Dhamma- 
sangani those mental states or dharmas which reveal the 
nature of mind or nama, the states of internal sense, are 
discussed. In Book II the states revealing the rupa or 
the outer world, the products of external sense, are given. 
Dharma is a comprehensive term including the objects of 
external and internal senses. The phenomena of the 
wcrld are divided into two classes : (i) Rupino, having 

form, the four elements and their derivatives ; (2) arupino, 
not having form, modes or phases of consciousness, i.e. the 
skandhas of feeling, perception, synthesis and intellect. 
Rupa means at first sight the extended universe as distinct 
from the mental one, the world seen as distinct from the 
unseen mind, the arupino. Slowly it comes to signify the 
worlds in which it is possible for us to have rebirth, for 
these are also capable of being seen. It is well for us to 
note that the early Buddhist did not care to carry his 
researches deeper, since his main interest was ethical. He 
argued to the nature of the external w'orld from the physical 
basis of his own being. 


• Milinda, 2 . 8. 



ETHICAL IDEALISM OF BUDDHISM 401 

Nama, the mental, includes citta, heart or emotion, 
vijnana, or consciousness, and manas, or mind. We have 
also as a division of namarupa the five skandhas, which 
are: (i) Rupa, material attributes; (2) Vedana, feeling; 
(3) Samjna, perception ; (4) Samskaras, or mental dispo- 
sitions and will; (5) Vijnana, or reason. These terms are 
not used with any strict connotation. They constitute the 
complex grouping of self. Cetana or will has a number of 
co-efficients. “ Samskara ” includes a miscellaneous host 
of tendencies, intellectual, affectional and volitional, and has 
for its specific function synthesis. Vijnana is intelligence 
which comprehends abstract contents. 1 It is not conditioned 
by sense contact, while feelings, perceptions and dispositions 
are. 

The scheme, which shows a pretty high development 
of the power of introspective analysis, agrees with modern 
psychology in fundamentals. It recognises broadly the 
distinction between body and mind, the physical and the 
psychical aspects of the individual. In the psycho-physical 
organism, the part that is relatively stable is the body, or 
rupakaya, and the unstable one is the mind. On the mental 
side we have perception, conception, feeling or affection 
and conation or will. The first three can be easily traced 
to Saihjna and Vedana, and Vijnana. Vedana is affectional 
reaction. 2 It is mental experience, awareness and enjoy- 
ment, and has the three qualities of pleasant, painful and 
neutral, resulting from contact with objects of sense, and 
itself producing tahha, craving or desire. Samjna is the 
recognition of the general relations as well as the percep- 
tion of all kinds, sensuous and mental . 3 We have here dis- 
tinct cognition. The series of cognitions called cittasamtana 
goes on uninterruptedly through the successive existences. 

‘ It has eighty-nine subdivisions, and comprises the distinct consciousness 
of what is transmitted through the organs of seeing, hearing, smelling, tasting, 
touching, and the sixth sense, manas, as well as the discrimination of good, 
bad and indifferent. These aggregates with their sub-divisions, 193 in 
number, exhaust all the elements, material, intellectual and moral, of the 
individual. See Khys Davids : Buddhism, pp. 90-93 ; Aniruddha, Com- 
pendium of Philosophy, Pali Text Series, pp. 16, 88. 

* Milmda, ii. 3. 10. See also Bnddhaghosa’s Atthasahnl, E.T., p. 54. 

i Milmda, ii. 3. 11. 



402 INDIAN PHILOSOPHY 

The object of consciousness may be either an object of sense 
or of thought. 

According to Buddhagho§a, consciousness first comes 
into touch with its object, and then perception, feeling and 
volition arise. It is, however, not possible to break up the 
unitary conscious state into several successive stages answer- 
ing to feeling, perception, etc. “ In one whole conscious- 
ness, it cannot be said that this comes first and that next.” 1 
It is interesting to know that Buddhaghosa looked upon 
Vedana or feeling as the most complete awareness and 
enjoyment of the object . 1 

We may here notice the theory of sense perception of the 
early Buddhists. The visual sensation of the blue image 
arises when the colour blue which is given and the organ 
of the eye meet. Sometimes a distinction is drawn between 
hetu, cause, and pratyaya, or condition ; while the visual 
sensation is conditioned by the eye and the object, the 
blue colour, it is said to be caused by the preceding cogni- 
tion. The objects of sense are of five classes : sight, sound, 
smell, taste and touch. Buddhaghosa distinguishes these 
into asampattarupa, or those where the organism does not 
come into contact with the objective sources of the objects, 
as sight and sound, and sampattarupa, smell, taste, etc., 
which are only modifications of touch. Democritus regarded 
all sensation as touch or its development. The fivefold 
objects are called pancarammana. When the organ and 

1 Atthasalinl, pp. 143-144. 

1 Feeling " has (I) experiencing as characteristic, (2) enjoying as function, 

(3) taste of the mental properties as manifestation, and (4) tranquillity as 
proximate cause. (1) There is no such thing as feeling in the four planes 
of existence without the characteristic of experiencing. (2) If it be said 
that the function of enjoying the object is obtained only in pleasurable 
feeling, we reject that opinion and say : Let it be pleasurable feeling or 
painful feeling or neutral feeling, all have the function of enjoying (anu- 
bhavana) the object. As regards enjoying the taste of an object, the remain- 
ing associated states enjoy it only partially ; of contact there is (the function 
of) the mere touching, of perception the mere noting or perceiving, of voli- 
tion the mere co-ordinating, of consciousness the mere cognising. But 
feeling alone, through governance, proficiency, mastery, enjoys the taste 
of an object . . . therefore it is said that enjoyment or experience is 
its function. (3) The mere presence 01 feeling as such is referred 
to by calling its manifestation ' tasting a mental property ' (cetasika). 

(4) And inasmuch as a tranquillised body enjoys bliss or happiness, feeling 
has tranquillity as its proximate cause " (Atthasllinl, E.T., pp. 145-146). 



ETHICAL IDEALISM OF BUDDHISM 403 


the object come into contact sensation arises. As a' matter 
01 fact, the flux of consciousness is only “ the sequence of 
states of mind caused by the casual impact of sense and 
object. The phassa, or the contact, takes place ‘ as when 
two rams are butting together.’ The eye is one and the 
object another, and the compact is the union of the two.” 1 
The Dhammasangani holds that external phenomena are 
caused by the impinging on and modification of the internal 
or personal rupa by way of sense. There are other views 
which make the eye and the objects condition each other. 
Without the eye there is no visible world, and without a 
world no seeing eye . 3 

1 Milinda, ii. 3. 9 ; see also Majjhima, i. 3. 

2 Mrs. Rhys Davids gives the following summary of the account of sense 
perception contained in the Dhammasangani : 

A. The Senses. 

First, a general statement relating each sense in turn, (a) to nature (the 
four elements ; ( b ) to the individual organism and affirming its invisibility 
and its power of impact. 

Secondly, an analysis of the sensory process in each case, into — 

( а ) A personal agency or apparatus capable of reacting to an impact 
not itself. 

(б) An impinging " form ” or form producing an impact of one specific 
kind. 

(e) Impact between (a) and (6). 

(d) Resultant modification of the mental continuum, viz., in the first 
place, contact (of a specific sort) ; then hedonistic result, or intellectual 
result, or presumably both. The modification is twice stated in each case, 
emphasis being laid on the mutual impact, first as causing the modification, 
then as constituting the object of attention in the modified consciousness of 
the persons affected. 

B. The Sense-Objects. 

First, a general statement, relating each kind of sense-object in turn 
to nature, describing some of the typical varieties, and affirming its invisi- 
bility, except in the case of visual objects and its power of producing impact. 

Secondly, an analysis of the sensory process in each case as under A, 
but, as it were, from the side of the sense-object, thus : — 

(a) A mode of form or sense-object, capable of producing impact on 
special apparatus of the individual organism, 

[i) The impact of that apparatus. 

(c) The reaction or complementary impact of the sense-object. 

( d ) Resultant modification of the mental continuum, viz., in the first 
place contact (of a specific sort), then hedonistic result, or intellectual result, 
or presumably both. The modification is twice stated, in each case emphasis 
bung laid on the mutual impact, first as causing the modification, then as 
constituting the object of attention 111 the modified consciousness thus 
affected. ( Buddhist Psychology, pp. li.-hv.) 



404 INDIAN PHILOSOPHY 

The objects of thought are also of five classes : (i) Citta, 
mind ; (2) Cetasika, mental properties ; (3) Pasada rupa, 
sensitive qualities of the body, and sukuma rupa, subtle 
qualities of the body ; (4) Pannatti, name, idea, notion, 

concept ; (5) Nirvana. These are Dhammarammana, where 
Dhamma means the mental presentation. No definite 
account is given of the way in which sense experience is 
transformed into knowledge of meaning and ideas. It is 
said that the mind, which is regarded as a material organ, 
forms out of the sensations the intellectual ideas and notions. 
We do not know how it happens. Citta, which is both 
thing and thought, is said to work up the sensations into 
the concrete stream of consciousness. The seventh book 
of Abidhamma pitaka is called Patthana, or relations. The 
Buddhist recognises how all consciousness is a relation of 
subject and object. In all these processes we are assuming 
the activity of vijnana, the peculiar function of which is 
recognition, 1 which is a purely intellectual reaction. 

Conation or will of modern psychology cannot easily be 
traced in the Buddhist analysis. Yet it is quite as funda- 
mental and ultimate as cognition or affection. In the 
Buddhist theory, will is the most dominant aspect of con- 
sciousness, the basal element of human life. There is no 
ground to think that will in Buddhist psychology is a result- 
ant of the integration of the five skandhas. We may say 
that vijnana, vedana and samskara roughly correspond to 
knowledge, feeling and will. Childers in his dictionary 
brings the concepts answering to modern conation under 
samskaras. They include chando, desire, and viriyam, effort. 
This latter, according to Mrs. Rhys Davids, assists all other 
faculties. In Aristotle we find that conative effort is the 
vital element in appetite, passion, choice or will. Mrs. 
Rhys Davids is of opinion that though there are no indica- 
tions of a clearly developed psychology with its nice dis- 
tinctions between appetite, desire and choice, still we have 
the main lines between the psychological fact of willing 
and the ethical judgment of it clearly drawn. In the 
Pitakas she thinks there is a " pretty consistent discrimi- 
nation in the employment of terms connoting volition 

■ Milinda, ii. 3. 12 . 



ETHICAL IDEALISM OF BUDDHISM 405 


between psychological import only and ethical or moral 
implication. In two parallel passages in the Dhamma- 
sangani, for instance, the term which best conveys the 
meaning of bare simple conation or consciousness of energy, 
namely viriyam, as well as all its synonyms and comple- 
mentary terms — trying and striving, effort and endeavour, 
zeal and ardour, vigour and resistance, persistent striving, 
sustained desiring and exertion, grasping of a weight — is 
used to describe, in part, both the state or quality of mind 
which is morally good and that which is morally bad. To 
all such terms, then, when used of psychological activity. 
Buddhism attaches no blame any more than we should. 
When, on the other hand, the sacred writings wish to 
convey ethical values in terms of volitional import, either 
distinct and special words are used, or else the term of 
volition is explicitly qualified as referring to an object of 
perverted desires, or to a morbid state of will ; want or wish 
(akankha) becomes craving or thirst (tanha), for desire 
(chando) we get lust (chandorago), lusts of the flesh (kama- 
rago), sensual delight (nandirago), or else some qualifying 
phrase, desire for form (rupachando), and so forth.” 1 Every- 
thing is made a modification of will. Modern psychology 
emphasises the conative or purposive nature of all mental 
life. Sometimes the conation has a theoretical interest, 
sometimes practical. To adopt Professor Alexander's 
language : “ Theoretical acts of mind are such as subserve 
the continuance of the object before the mind without 
alteration of it. Practical acts are such as alter the objects.” 
Cognition and conation “ are not distinguishable elements 
in every psychosis, but every species of conation assumes 
two different forms, theoretical or practical, according to 
the different interests which the conation possesses .” 1 
Generally theory ends in practice. Cognitions are emi- 
nently practical. Buddhist psychology is right when in 
the doctrine of pratityasamutpada it says that perceptions 
excite desires. The object on which conation is directed 
may be sensed, perceived, imaged, remembered or thought. 
Cognition and will become the theoretical and practical 

1 J.R.A.S., 1898, p. 49. 

* British Journal of Psychology, ign, p. 244. 



406 INDIAN PHILOSOPHY 

varieties of conation. Physiological psychology adopts the 
sensory-motor circuit as the unit. Of it the afferent part 
answers to cognition, the efferent to the conative. The 
whole process is looked upon as one, and these two are 
distinguished in it as elements. Where all mental life is 
conational, will represents the active pursuit of the end, 
transforming it from an ideal into a reality. Even here the 
practical aspect is the dominant one. The theoretical cog- 
nition arises when the practical expression is arrested or 
inhibited. The mere joy of contemplation is also a cona- 
tive development where the practical interest is the delight 
itself. Feeling, again, is not independent of conation. It 
accompanies all acts. Professor Stout has given up the 
old tripartite classification of mental states and reverts to 
the ancient bipartite analysis of mind, bringing the affective 
and conational elements together under the name of interest 
as against the element of cognition. If we discard the 
separateness of cognition and make it the theoretical aspect 
of conation we get to the Buddhist emphasis on conation 
as the central fact of mental life. 

Though there is no transcendental Atman, its place, 
according to M. Poussin , 1 is taken by vijnana. That which 
passes from life to life is vijnana . 1 We are said to have 
vijnana santana, or continuum. This is not a permanent, 
unchanging, transmigrating entity, but a series of individual 
and momentary consciousnesses, a regular procession of 
states. The vijnana series is distinct from vedana, or feelings, 
and is autonomous and independent of physical processes. 

Buddhist psychology may best be described as associa- 
tionist. For each group of dharmas the antecedent facts 
which determine their appearance in consciousness are 
sought out according to certain laws, and explanations 
remarkable for that age are suggested. To the question 
why do we have particular ideas when particular impres- 
sions occur, Nagasena replies : " Because of their being a a 
incline, and because of their being a door, and because of 
their being a habit, and because of their being an associa- 
tion.” The incline is explained in terms which remind us 

■ Journal AsiaHque, 1902. This view is probably later than the pitakas. 

» \\ .B.T., p. 207. 



ETHICAL IDEALISM OF BUDDHISM 407 


of modern physiological psychology and its law of neural 
habit. “ When it rains, where will the water go to ? ” 
“ It will follow the slope of the ground.” " And if it were 
ho rain again, where would the water go to ? ” - “ It would 
go the same way as the first water had gone.” 1 Dr. 
McDougall writes : “ We have good reason to believe that 
the passage of impulse through a chain of neurones leaves 
that chain more or less permanently altered in such a way 
that its resistance to the passage of the impulse is in some 
degree diminished.” The path by which the discharge 
takes place becomes according to the law of neural habit 
one of lowered resistance. 2 The Buddhist explanation is, 
of course, a psychological insight, and not the result of a 
study of anatomy and physiology of the brain, sciences 
then, perhaps, hardly in existence. The conditions of recall 
are also mentioned. 

Speaking of the duration of mental states, it is said 
every state of consciousness has three phases : genesis 
(uppada), development (thiti), and dissolution (bhanga). 
Each of these occupies an infinitesimal division of time, 
an instant, a ksana. The space of three instants in which 
a state of consciousness becomes, exists and vanishes is 
called a cittaksana. Some Buddhists are of opinion that 
there is not even an instant for which the conscious state 
is steady. It simply grows and decays with no static 
interval, however infinitesimal it might be. Vissuddhi- 
magga says : " The being of a past moment of thought 
has lived, but does not live nor will it live. The being 
of a future moment will live, but has not lived nor does it 
live. The being of the present moment of thought does 
live, but has not lived nor will it live.” 3 

Every conscious state is said to be a disturbance of 
the stream of being w’hich is the flow of sub-conscious 
existence. Buddhist psychology recognised unconscious life. 
It is called vidhimutta, or free from process, as distinct 
from vidhicitta, or waking consciousness. The two are 
divided by the threshold of consciousness, the manodvara, 
or the door of mind. It is there where the stream of 

■ ii. 3. 7 . » Physiological Psychology, pp. 125-6, 

3 W.B.T., p. 150. 



408 INDIAN PHILOSOPHY 

simple being or bhavanga 1 is cut off or arrested. Bhavanga 
is subconscious existence, or more accurately existence free 
from waking consciousness. 2 3 

A consistent theory of phenomenalism cannot account 
for the elaboration of similar impressions into general 
notions or the cognisance of unity in diversity. Buddhist 
psychology gives us an analysis of mental states, but does 
not raise the question of the necessity of a subject in the 
process of attention, will, etc. It speaks of feelings and 
relations, but does not ask whether they can exist apart 
from a combining consciousness. The subject of activity 
according to the Buddhists is the sum total of the organic 
and mental dispositions and acts. " By name and form 
are deeds done,” and this of course is an ever changing 
composite. We are even told that we should not ask who 
experiences contact but only conditioned by what is their 
contact. 3 Our sense of individuality is an illusion. Yet 
we speak as if the “I” attains rebirth or reaches nirvana. 
Buddhaghosa explains it in this way : “ Just as in the 
case of those elements of being which go under the name 
of tree, as soon as at any point the fruit springs up, it is 
then said ' the tree bears fruit ’ or the ‘ tree has fructified,’ 
so also in the case of those groups which go under the name 
of ‘ god ’ or ‘ man,’ when a fruition of happiness or misery 
springs up at any point, then it is said that ‘ god ' or ‘ man ’ 
is happy or miserable.” 4 Though the present self may not 
be the past, it is yet the outcome of the past, the resultant 
of the series. 5 

1 Bhava, being ; anga, part. Bhavanga means both organic existence 
and subconscious existence. All is alive ; only in some cases rve have 
consciousness and in others not. 

* Nineteen kinds of bhavanga are distinguished. Of them ten are 
possible in kama loka, five in rupa loka and four in arupa loka. According 
to Mrs. Rhys Davids : " Consciousness is only an intermittent series of 
psychic throbs associated with a living organism, beating out their coming 
to know through one brief span of life ’’ ( Buddhist Psychology, p. 16). Bha- 
vahga is subconscious existence when subjectively viewed, though objectively 
it is sometimes taken to mean nirvana. 

3 See Samyutta Nikaya, ii. 13. 4 W.B.T., p. 241. 

5 “ When, O Great King, a man lights a candle, will not the candle burn 
through the night ? ” " Yes, sure, it will burn through the night." " How 

then, O Great King, is the flame, during the first watch of the night, the 
same that it is in the second watch '( " “ No, sir. . . . But the light burns 



ETHICAL IDEALISM OF BUDDHISM 409 


The conception of the soul retains enough meaning to 
make rebirth significant. The difficulty is that, if there 
be no permanent soul, then punishment has no meaning. 
At the time of the punishment the individual is no longer 
the same being who committed the crime. But there is 
enough identity to justify punishment. There is no 
metaphysical entity to justify punishment ; yet the 
individual is not a haphazard succession of unconnected 
phenomena but a living complex, a chain of causes and 
effects, physical, psychical and moral. The king asks 
Nagasena : “ He who is born, Nagasena, does he remain 
the same or become another ? ” “ Neither the same nor 

another.” " Give me an illustration.” “ Now, what do 
you think, O king, you were once a baby, a tender thing, 
and small in size, lying flat on your back, was that the same 
as you who are now grown up ? ” “ No. That child was 

one and I am another.” “ If you are not that child, it will 
follow that you have had neither mother nor father, no, 
nor teacher.” 1 The re-born man is not the dead man, 
yet not different from him. He arises from him. Every 
day we are new, and yet not quite new. There is persistent 
continuity as well as unceasing change. Buddhaghosa 
says : “ If taking any continuous series an absolute same- 
ness obtained, then, for example, sour cream could not 
arise from milk. And if there were absolute difference, 
the milk could not generate sour cream in the ordinary 
course of things.” There is neither absolute identity nor 
absolute difference. The whole is a series. The new 
creation is so immediate on the old that for all practical 
purposes it may be taken as the continuance of the same. 
There is a continuity of karma. Rebirth is new birth. 
Even in the Upanisads the unique ever-growing imper- 
manent self it is that wanders in the world of samsara and 
is the object of retributive justice. Rebirth requires the 
persistence of this ego. Through the conceptions of imper- 


the whole night adhering to the same matter.” " So also, O Great King, 
the chain of the elements of things is joined together. One element is always 
coming into being, another is always ceasing and passing away. Without 
beginning, without end, the change continues.” (Milinda ) 

‘ Milinda. 



410 INDIAN PHILOSOPHY 

manence and causality a dynamic conception of self is 
evolved. Each experience as it rises and passes leads up 
to or becomes or ends in another experience, moment or 
phase of life, which sums up the whole past. In terms 
suggestive of M. Bergson’s theory of memory, the Buddhists 
contend that there is no separate memory, for the whole 
past is contained in the present as a causative influence 
or force pursuing it throughout. “ That which we have 
felt, sought, willed from infancy is here now, bending over 
the present moment which goes merging into it, pressing 
against the gate of consciousness which would leave it 
without.” 1 The past bites into the present and leaves it? 
mark on it. 

XIII 

Pratityasamutpada, or the Doctrine of Dependent 

Origination 

The coming into being of life which is suffering, as well 
as its cessation, is accounted for by the doctrine of Prati- 
tyasamutpada. “ Then the Blessed One, during the first 
watch of the night, fixed his mind upon the chain of 
causation, in direct and in reverse order : ‘ From ignorance 
spring the sariiskaras (conformations), from the samskaras 
springs consciousness, from consciousness spring name 
and form, from name and form spring the six provinces 
(of the six senses, eye, ear, nose, tongue, body or touch 
and mind), from the six provinces springs contact, from 
contact springs sensation, from sensation springs thirst (or 
desire), from thirst springs attachment, from attachment 
springs becoming, from becoming springs birth, from birth 
spring old age and death, grief, lamentation, suffering, 
dejection and despair, Such is the origin of this whole 
mass of suffering. Again, by the destruction of ignorance, 
which consists in the complete absence of lust, the 
‘iam^karas are destroyed ; by the destruction of the 
samskaras, consciousness is destroyed ; by the destruction 
of consciousness, name and form are destroyed ; by the 
destruction of name and form, the six provinces are 

* Creative Ev . l p, 5, 



ETHICAL IDEALISM OF BUDDHISM 411 


destroyed ; by the destruction of the six provinces, con- 
tact is destroyed ; by the destruction of contact, sensa- 
tion is destroyed ; by the destruction of sensation, thirst 
is destroyed ; by the destruction of thirst, attachment is 
destroyed ; by the destruction of attachment, becoming 
is destroyed ; by the destruction of becoming, birth is 
destroyed ; by the destruction of birth, old age and death, 
grief, lamentation, suffering, dejection and despair are 
destroyed. Such is the cessation of this whole mass of 
suffering.’ ” 1 Warren believes that the “ full formula in 
its present shape is a piece of patchwork put together of 
two or more that were current in Buddha’s time.” It is 
based on the truths that man is bound to the wheel of 
life, and it is possible for him to free himself from these 
bonds by arresting the transitive character of causation. 
A view similar to this theory of the wheel of causation is 
suggested in the Upanisads. 2 The wheel of causation is 
sometimes distinguished into elements derived from the past 
life, those from the present and those of the future. 3 

The will to live is the ground of our existence. Its 
negation is our salvation. The greatest sin of man is to 
have been born, as Schopenhauer is fond of quoting from 
Calderon. It is this simple fact that is elaborated in the 


* Mahavagga, i. I. 1-3; S.B.E., xiii ; see also Milinda, ii. 3. 1. 

1 The eight fetters of the vital air, speech, tongue, eye, ear, mind, hands 
and skin and their auxiliaries, mentioned in the Upanisads (Brli , iii. 2), 
may be the basis of the doctrine. The word Brahmacakra, or the wheel 
of Brahma, occurs in the 6vetasvatara Upanisad (vi. 1). It is called in 
early Buddhism bhavacakra, or the wheel of existence. 

3 The following table brings out the distinction. See Majjhima Nikaya 
140 ; Mahapadana suttanta, ii. 

f Avidya, or ignorance. 

1. Those due to the past life Saniskaras, or predispositions or 

l tendencies. 

I" Vi j h ana, or consciousness of self. 
Numarupa, or mind and body. 
Sadayatana, or the sense organs. 
Sparsa, or contact. 

Yedana, or emotion. 

Tanha, or craving 

tUpadana, or clinging or attachment 

rBhava, or coming to be. 

3. Those of the future life < Jati, or rebirth. 

Uaramaratja, old age and death. 

14 


2. Those due to the present 
life 


VOL. I 



412 INDIAN PHILOSOPHY 

causal chain. It embodies the second great truth that 
suffering originates from desire, and sums up the conditions 
of existence. The Nidanas are the twelve successive causes 
where each one conditions the next. With the exception 
of the first, avidya, or ignorance, and the last, jaramarana, 
old age and death, the nidanas are called the ten karmas or 
acts. In early Buddhism, these are not so much substances 
as phases of being. There is no fixity about the number 
or order of the nidanas. In the doctrines of the pratltyasa- 
mutpada and the nidanas we find formulated a series of 
terms expressing the interrelated or mutually dependent 
order obtaining throughout the world of sentient existence. 

The first factor in this series is avidya, or ignorance. 
The false sense of " I ” is the central support of individual 
being. It is the bearer of karma as well as its breeder. 
Individuality is the product of avidya and karma, even as 
the flame is the fiery spark as well as the fuel that feeds 
it. Avidya hides the nature of life, which is sorrow . 1 The 
stress on ignorance is nothing peculiar to Buddhism. 
“ Things are what they are,” as Bishop Butler says, “ and 
the consequences of them will be what they will be ; why 
then should we desire to be deceived ? ” Yet we do 
deceive ourselves every day. Buddha asks us to face facts, 
know what they are and mean. It is ignorance consisting 
in assuming as real what is not, that produces the craving 
for life. It impels us to live and enjoy the world. The 
lust for life is considered by Buddha to be ignoble, stupid, 
moral bondage, one of the four mental intoxicants. If 
man is to be relieved from the misery of mundane existence, 
the false desire should be rooted out and the rage to live 
suppressed. Ignorance in early Buddhism is the cause of 
egoism, or the I-sense. It makes the individual feel him- 
self to be separate from the rest of existence, unrelated to 
the order of the world. We cling to our little self, struggle 
hard to perpetuate it, and continue it through all eternity . 2 

1 “ No world or thing here below ever fell into misery without having 
first fallen into folly.” (Carlyle, Latter-Day Pamphlets.) 

1 “ Men overlook the fact that they are really no more separate than 
a bubble in the foam of an ocean wave is separate from the sea, or than a 
cell in a living organism is separate from the organism of which it forms 
a part (Rhys The Religious Systems of the B'ofj. p. 1)4.) 



ETHICAL IDEALISM OF BUDDHISM 413 


Individual existence is an evil, desire is the outer expression 
of it. Men are unhappy simply because they are alive. 
The source of all sorrow is the affirmation of life. The 
force of ignorance is so great that in spite of the worst 
suffering men display a tenacious clinging to life. 

The second link in the chain is samskaras. The word 
samskara comes from a root which means to prepare or 
arrange. It stands for the product as well as for the 
process of making. It suggests how all things that are 
made have existence only in the making, how all being is 
becoming. Samskara is translated “ synthesis ” or “ con- 
formation.” It also means action, pure and impure, action 
possessing merit to be rewarded or guilt to be punished, 
here or hereafter. In the wide sense of the term it means 
the will force or the spirit energy which determines the 
new existence. In the Majjhima Nikaya we read : " It 

happens, my disciples, that a monk, endowed with faith, 
endowed with righteousness, endowed with knowledge of 
the doctrine, with resignation, with wisdom, communes 
thus with himself : ‘Now then could I, when my body is 

dissolved in death, obtain rebirth in a powerful princely 
family.’ He thinks this thought, dwells on this thought, 
cherishes this thought. These samskaras and internal con- 
ditions which he has thus cherished within him and 
fostered lead to his rebirth in such an existence. This, 
disciples, is the avenue, this the path which leads to rebirth 
in such an existence.” The train of thought is repeated 
with reference to the several classes of men and gods until 
its application is made to the highest condition of nirvana. 
The samskara may also be for the abolition of all samskaras 
or the gaining of wisdom and deliverance. 

In the causal nexus the third item is consciousness, from 
which name and form arise. " If consciousness, Ananda, 
did not enter into the womb, would name and form arise 
in the womb ? ” “ No, sir.” “ And if consciousness, 

Ananda, after it has entered into the womb were again to 
leave its place, would name and form be born into this 
life ? ” “ No, sir.” " And if consciousness, Ananda, were 

again lost to the boy or to the girl while they were yet 
small, would name and form attain growth, increase and 



414 INDIAN PHILOSOPHY 

progress ? ” “ No, sir.” 1 At death, while the other ele- 

ments, body, feelings, perceptions vanish, vijnana or 
consciousness persists, as the connecting link between the 
old and the new. Only when we attain nirvana or deliver- 
ance does it completely disappear. It is the element of 
consciousness which becomes the germ of the new being 
when the old being dies. This germ seeks in the womb 
the material stuff from which a new state of being is formed. 
If consciousness does not find the necessary material 
structure, it cannot develop. “ If, Ananda, consciousness 
were not to find name and material form as its resting-place, 
would then birth, old age and death, the origin and develop- 
ment of sorrow, reveal themselves in succession ? ” “ No, 

sir, they would not.” 1 

The world of objects stands opposed to the conscious 
subject. If there is no subject, there is no object. As we 
have seen, the activity of the six senses depends on the 
world which arises from the impressions produced when the 
senses come into touch with objects. The rise of impres- 
sions constitutes birth, their cessation, death. The two, 
consciousness and name and form, are inter-dependent. 
From them the six fields, eye, ear, nose, tongue, body and 
manas or mind, arise. Thence are developed the organs 
necessary for communication with the external world and 
the objects of the world, forms, sounds, colours, tastes, 
tangibility and thoughts. Thoughts are said to exist 
objectively confronting manas or mind, even as visible 
bodies exist before the eyes. Sometimes it is said that 
the eye is the product of seeing, the ear of hearing. 

From feeling arises tanha or thirst or longing, which leads 
us from birth to birth. It is the potent cause of life and 
suffering. We are because we thirst for being. We suffer 
because we thirst for pleasure : " Whomsoever thirst holds 
in subjection that thirst, that contemptible thing which 
pours its venom through the world, his suffering grows as 
the grass grows. Whosoever holds it in subjection . . . 
suffering falls off from him as the water drops from the lotus 
flowers.” 3 “As, if the root be uninjured, even as a hewn 

' Mahnnidana Sutta. ’ Mahapada.ua Sutta and Samyutta Nikaya, i. 

3 Dhammapada, v. 335, 



ETHICAL IDEALISM OF BUDDHISM 415 


tree grows up anew mightily, so, if the excitement of thirst 
be not wholly dead, suffering ever and anon breaks out 
again.” 1 Tanha or thirst in its threefold form is the cause 
of all suffering. 3 

From thirst comes clinging or upadana. The flame of 
thirst clings to the fuel of upadana. Wherever it may go 
the flame has the fuel clinging to it. Deliverance is the 
extinction of thirst, and bondage is clinging to things. 
Only by the cessation of clinging can the soul be delivered 
from sinful existence. 

From clinging to existence comes becoming or bhava, 
which Candrakirti interprets as the karma which brings about 
rebirth. 3 From becoming comes birth, from birth come old ago 
and death, pain and lamentation, sorrow, anxiety and despair. 

The whole scheme seems dogmatic. It aims at show- 
ing that vijnana, or consciousness of “ I,” does not reside 
in an eternal soul, but is a continuous phenomenon arising 
by way of cause and effect. It elaborates the answer con- 
tained in the second and third truths of the origin and 
the extinction of suffering. The vanity of all existence 
should be understood before the pain of existence can be 
abolished. The individuality to which we cling is only a 
form, an empty appearance occasioned by ignorance, the 
first and the root cause. The persistence of ignorance is 
indicated by the persistence of individuality. It is not a 
question of the individual manufacturing sorrow ; he is 
himself a form of sorrow. The sense of " I ” which gene- 
rates the illusion is itself an illusion. Individuality is the 
symptom as well as the disease. According to the Upani- 
sads the life history of the individual is continued so long 
as there Is ignorance in the understanding and leanness in 
the soul, In the Theologia Gennanica it is stated : “ Nothing 
burneth in hell but self-will,” and this self-will is avidya 
actualising itself. It is the cause as well as the product, the 
deceiver as well as the deceived. Ignorance and individuality 
are mutually dependent. Individuality means limitation, and 
limitation means ignorance. Ignorance can cease only with 
the cessation of the possibility of ignorance, namely, indi- 

* Dhammapada, v. 338. 1 See Malidvagga, 1 . 1. 2. 

I Punarbhavajanakam karma. Madliyamika Vjrtti. 



416 INDIAN PHILOSOPHY 

viduality. The whole world is a prey to ignorance, and so 
it suffers From the monarch to the mendicant, from 
the creeping thing of earth to the shining deva of heaven, 
everything suffers. “ There are five things which no 
samana and no Brahmana and no god, neither Mara, nor 
Brahma, nor any being in the universe can bring about : 
that what is subject to sickness should not be sick, that 
what is subject to death should not die, that what is sub- 
ject to decay should not decay, that what is liable to 
pass away should not pass away.” 1 Individuality born of 
avidya is the crux of all life, the original sin of all existence. 

The whole scheme rests on avidya, but we are not told 
how exactly this avidya arises. The beginning of the 
circuit is not apparent. We cannot find its cause. It 
seems to be a blind end or an incomprehensible reality 
which we must accept unthinkingly. To Buddha every- 
thing that lives, moves and displays individual existence 
does so through the power of avidya. Its presence is 
attested by the fact of existence. When we see a swinging 
pendulum we infer that it must have received a push. We 
infer avidya to be the antecedent condition of all existence. 
There is nothing prior to it, for the process of the world 
is beginningless. Buddha seems to assert the eternity of 
ignorance. In the chain of causation it is put first, for 
through it comes willing and through willing existence. 
When we ask what is it of which we are ignorant, early 
Buddhism says we are ignorant of the true nature of “ I ” 
and of the four noble truths. The cause of existence is a 
pre-existence like the present, where knowledge of the four 
sacred truths was not acquired. In the Upanisads the 
cause of all suffering is traced to the avidya, pertaining to 
the fundamental identity of the ego with the soul of the 
world, which leads to egoity. In both, egoity is the result 
of avidya, in both it is the non-possession of the saving 
knowledge that hides from us the truth. 

Buddha recognises that ignorance is nothing absolute. 
It comes into play that it may abolish itself. The meta- 
physical problem of the rise of ignorance seems to be evaded. 
We cannot account for it. We cannot say it is real, lor it 

* Angutir.ra Nikaya, ii. Oldeabcrg : Buddha, p. 217 



ETHICAL IDEALISM OF BUDDHISM 417 


can be sublated. Nor is it unreal, for in that case it could not 
produce anything. But Buddhism does not consider avidya 
to be a cause by courtesy. It is really the source of all 
existence. Perhaps the Upanisad theory is truer. The 
manifold world has the power of concealing reality at the 
same time that it manifests it. This power is the central 
force, the non-being, which pushes reality into outward 
manifestation. This explanation is not possible until we 
explicitly posit a central reality. So long as such a central 
being is not admitted, the nature of avidya and its origin 
will remain unsolved. But everything in Buddhism is 
favourable to the Upanisad hypothesis. Avidya is not 
absolutely useless. It provides room for the possibility of 
deliverance from itself. If nirvana is more than extinction, 
the truth more than a mere passing shadow, then indi- 
viduality is not absolute non-being, but a mixture of being 
and non-being, and avidya is not falsehood so much as lack 
of knowledge. When it is abolished truth remains. Later 
Buddhist writers like A£vagho§a speak of an abrupt 
upheaval of avidya out of the Tathata, the sudden rise of 
the individual will out of the universal. Vasubandhu 
explains the individuals as the imperfect reflections of the 
one universal mind. Avidya, then, is the £akti or the force of 
the absolute which brings about the procession of individual 
existences from out of the universal. It is the principle of 
negativity at the very heart of reality. Behind it our finite 
intellect cannot penetrate. Buddhistic metaphysics becomes 
satisfactory and intelligible only if it is completed by some 
form of absolute idealism. 


XIV 

Ethics 

Long to the watcher is the night 
To the weary wand’rer along the road. 

To him who will not see truth's light. 

Long is the torment of liis chain of births. 

So reads a Buddhist proverb . 1 Life on earth is a pil- 
grimage in a strange land w'hich the true knower is not 

1 Oldenberg: Ancient India, p. 94. 



418 INDIAN PHILOSOPHY 

anxious to prolong. Buddha points a way out of the 
inward contradiction characteristic of human life. Redemp- 
tion from suffering is the motive of Buddha’s teaching. 
To escape from the pervasive evil of existence is the goal 
of moral life. Salvation consists in the unmaking of our- 
selves. While nirvana is the highest goal, all forms of 
conduct which lead to it positively or bring about an undoing 
of rebirth are good, and their opposites bad. The ordinary 
standards of mundane values require modification. 

The ethics of Buddhism is based on its psychology . 1 
All sound philosophy and true ethics require correct psycho- 
logical analysis. The psychology of Buddhism is elaborated 
in the interests of ethics. The Buddhist discipline, the 
culture of the will, etc., require some theory of the way in 
which sensations are produced and attention developed. 
Buddhism analyses the moral personality of man and finds 
the principle of moral causation operating in its growth. 
Even the repudiation of the Atman theory has an ethical 
motive. Will, according to Buddhism, is man’s distinctive 
endowment by virtue of which he is an ethical being. The 
doctrine of karma or moral causation exhibits all existence 
as born of desire. With Kant, Buddha would say that the 
only thing in the world which possesses an absolute value 
is the good will, the will freely determined by the moral 
law. All human beings are capable of willing the good 
as good. Individuality ceases when, with the wearying 
of the will, action ceases. Action ceases when delight of 
the senses in objects ceases. This delight ceases by the 
recognition of the transiency of life. We must try to break 
up the composite self so as to prevent fresh formations. 
Escape from the chain of rebirth into the bliss of life 
eternal is the ideal of Buddhism, as of many other Indian 
and non-Indian systems. The Orphic Brotherhood yearned 
to be delivered from the grievous wheel of re-incarnations, 
and Plato believed in a beatific condition where we can 
eternally contemplate the archetypes of truth, goodness and 
beauty. 

1 Martincan was wrong when he said that “ psychological ethics are 
altogether peculiar to Christendom." ( Types oj Lthical Theotv, vol. i., 
p. 14.) 



ETHICAL IDEALISM OF BUDDHISM 419 

Karma is an act both intellectual and' volitional. It is 
doubly qualified, being a mental intention issuing in an 
effect. Psychologically every act has three sides : (i) the 
volitional preparation, (2) the act itself, and (3) what is 
called the “ back ” of the act, the feeling of regret or 
remorse which follows the act. The first is the intention 
or the resolve. Though it is not the act itself, it is not 
meaningless. Again, every choice and every act possesses a 
real worth and value, transient in time but permanent in 
character. Some acts have their retribution immediately, 
some after a time, perhaps in the next existence. Acts are 
distinguished into two kinds : (1) those which are pure, 

free from asravas, and (2) those which are impure or tainted 
by them. The pure ones, free from passion, desire and 
ignorance, do not entail any retribution, do not lead to 
but destroy fresh individual existence. They prepare the 
way for nirvana. Meditation on the four noble truths by 
which one tries to enter the paths of arhatship is a pure 
act, above good or evil consequences. All other acts are 
impure from this standpoint, and among the impure ones 
which have as their general feature accompaniment by 
some reward or retribution in this life or later, a distinc- 
tion is made into good and bad acts. Different standards 
are adopted. Good acts are those which lead to the con- 
quest of passions, desires, and illusions of the ego. Bad 
acts are those which lead to unpleasant retributions. Again, 
good acts are those done with the motive of happiness in 
the world hereafter (lokottara), bad acts are those done 
with the idea of gaining happiness here below. The former 
destroy desire and lead to a cancelling of the rewards of 
other acts. Their eventual fruit seems to be nirvana or 
deliverance. Again, good acts are those which aim at the 
welfare of others, bad acts those which aim at self- 
advantage. These different criteria agree with one another. 
The acts which lead to a conquest of passion or a really 
good life hereafter are those which aim at the world wel- 
fare. They possess the three features of absence of lust 
(alobha), absence of hatred (advesa), and absence of delu- 
sion (amoha). The bad acts which aim at self-interest 
and happiness on earth and lead to the bondage of birth 

14 * 


VOL. I 



420 


INDIAN PHILOSOPHY 


are born of a false vision (mithyadrsti), lust and hatred. 1 
Moral evil is due to ignorance or mistaking the value and 
nature of things. 

The system enunciated by Buddha is free from the 
extremes of self-indulgence and self-mortification. Buddha 
found after six years of ascetic life that the true way “ can- 
not be attained by one who has lost his strength.” “ There 
are two extremes which he who has gone forth ought not to 
follow — habitual devotion, on the one hand, to the passions, 
to the pleasure of sensual things ; and habitual devotion, 
on the other hand, to self-mortification, which is painful, 
ignoble, unprofitable. There is a middle path discovered 
by the Tathagata— a path which opens the eyes and 
bestows understanding, which leads to peace, to insight to 
the higher wisdom, to nirvana Verily it is the Aryan 
eightfold path. That is to say : right beliefs, right aspira- 
tions, right speech, right conduct, right mode of livelihood, 
right effort, right mindedness and right rapture.” 2 This 
eightfold path represents the morality of Buddhism. 

Right belief has the first place. What we do reflects 
what we think. Wrong acts issue from wrong beliefs. 
Mostly we do not realise that the elements of self will go 
dowm to dust in death and so cling to individuality. To 
remove wrong views, right knowledge is necessary. In 
Buddhist psychology will and intelligence go together. 

Right aspiration is a product of right vision. “ It is the 
longing for renunciation ; the hope to live in love with all ; 
the aspiration of true humanity.” 3 Giving up the idea of 
separateness, the aspirant works for the whole. The resolve 
must be a real one, according to the Mahayana, making the 
aspirant say : “ I must bear the burden of all creatures.” 4 
Aspirations must be turned to activities. They must 
find expression in right speech, right action, and right living. 
“ To abstain from falsehood, to abstain from back-biting, 
to abstain from harsh language, and to abstain from frivo- 
lous talk is called right spu ch.” 

Right action is unselfish action. Buddha does not 

■ See W.B.T., pp. 216-18. 

* First sermon on setting in motion the Wheel of the Law 

1 S atavibhano.i. 4 Vajradvaja Snt*a. 



ETHICAL IDEALISM OF BUDDHISM 421 


believe in ceremonialism, prayer and ritual, spell and sacri- 
fice. “ Better homage to a man grounded in the dharma 
than to Agni for a hundred years.” When once a Brahmin 
put it to him that bathing in the Bahuka river washes 
a sinner of his sin, Buddha retorted : “ The Bahuka, the 
Adhika cannot purify the fool of his sin, bathe he himself 
ever so often. ... No river can cleanse the doer of evil, 
the man of malice, the perpetrator of crime. To the pure 
it is ever the holy month of Phaggu. To the pure it is 
always a perpetual fast. To the man of good deeds it is 
a vow everlasting. Have thy bath here, even here, O 
Brahmin, be kind to all beings. If thou speakest not 
false, if thou killest not life, if thou takest not what is 
given thee, secure in self-denial — what wouldst thou gain 
by going to Gaya ? Any water is Gaya to thee.” 1 “ Not 
superstitious rites,” says A£oka, “ but kindness to servants 
and underlings, respect to those deserving of respect, self- 
control coupled with kindness in dealing with living 
creatures, these and virtuous deeds of like nature are verily 
the rites that are everywhere to be performed.” “ Pious 
regulations are of small account, whereas meditation is 
excellent.” 2 3 Buddha did not declare open war against the 
ceremonialism of the times, but tried to infuse moral signifi- 
cance into its forms and thus undermine it. “ Anger, 
drunkenness, deception, envy, these constitute uncleanli- 
ness ; not the eating of flesh.” 3 Again, “ neither absti- 
nence, nor going naked, nor shaving the head, nor a rough 
garment, neither offerings to priests, nor sacrifices to the 
gods will cleanse a man who is not free from delusions.” 
Buddha was against the worship of the ugly and the repul- 
sive embodied in certain morbid types of asceticism. His 
sweet reasonableness comes in his condemnation of unnatural 
forms of asceticism. 

Buddhism insists on purity of motive and humility in 
life. Of the paremitas, or perfections which help us to 
attain nirvana, rila has an important place. The dis- 


1 Laksimnarsu, Essence of Buddhism, p. 230. 

1 ASoka Pillar Edict, vii. 

3 Cf. " It is not that which entereth into a man that dcfileth him, but 
that which cometh out.” 



422 INDIAN PHILOSOPHY 

tinction between £ila, or morality, and dana, or charity, is 
one between passive and active virtue, nivrtti and pravrtti. 
Sila is the observance of rules like that of non-violence, 
dana implies active self-sacrifice and helping those in need 
of help. It is living for the good and benefit of all beings. 
The ideal disposition of charity is brought out in the story 
of Yuan Chwang, who, when he was about to be sacrificed 
for the goddess Durga by pirates, thought : “ Let me return 
and be born here below that I may instruct and convert 
these men, and cause them to practise themselves in doing 
good and giving up their evil deeds, and thus by diffusing 
far and wide the benefits of the dharma to give rest to all 
the world." 

Right action leads to right living, free from lying and 
deceit, fraud and chicanery. Thus far the stress has been 
on conduct, but inner purification is also attended to. 
The aim of all endeavour is to remove the causes of sorrow. 
Subjective purification is needed for it. The last three of 
right effort, right thought and right tranquillity refer to it. 

Right effort consists in practising control of passions so 
as to prevent the rise of bad qualities. An inhibition of 
the bad and a reinforcement of the good by mental avoid- 
ance and concentration is what this means. If we want 
to expel an undesirable idea which haunts our mind, Buddha 
recommends the following five methods : (i) Attend to 

some good idea. (2) Face the danger of the consequences 
of letting the bad idea develop into action. (3) Turn 
attention away from the bad idea. (4) Analyse its antece- 
dents and so nullify the consequent impulse. (5) Coerce 
the mind with the aid of bodily tension. By a£ubhabhavana, 
or reflection on the evil, we acquire a disgust for all that 
is corrupt. " Reverend Sir, have you seen a woman pass 
this way ? ” and the elder said, “ I cannot say whether it 
is a woman or a man that passed this way. This I know 
that a set of bones is travelling on this road.” 1 Without 

* M. Poussin describes the force of true insight as distinct from intellectual 
knowledge in these words : " Whosoever understands the truth of suffering, 
under its fourfold aspect, will acknowledge the falsehood of vulgar notions, 
and will see pleasure and existence as transitory and painful, but he will 
not destroy his innate desire of pleasure, his thirst after existence. What 
is to be gained is a profound and efficacious feeling of the miseries of life, 



ETHICAL IDEALISM OF BUDDHISM 423 

right effort there can be no enlightenment. Through it 
alone can we destroy anger, envy, pride and attachment to 
objects. 

Right effort cannot be isolated from right thinking. 
To avoid mental unsteadiness, the mind that plays and 
roves 1 is to be controlled. Emotions are to Buddhism as 
to stoicism, “ failures, disturbances of moral health, and if 
indulged become chronic diseases of the soul.” They 
destroy all healthy endeavour. Even spiritual pride 
endangers moral progress. “ Whosoever is pure and knows 
that he is pure and finds pleasure in knowing that he is 
pure becomes impure and dies with an impure thought. 
Whosoever is impure and knows that he is impure and 
makes effort to become pure dies of a pure thought.” 
“ On the mind depends dharma, on the practice of dharma 
depends enlightenment.” 2 

While the five skandhas are said to constitute an 
exhaustive account of the nature of the human being, so 
long as he is looked upon as a unit of the empirical world, 
we get a slight modification of this view when we turn to 
the Buddhist emphasis on intuitive knowledge, called 
prajna. The theory of knowledge based on the skandhas 
is sensationalism. The concept of prajna compels a change 
in it. Prajna stands for the highest activity of the human 
mind, and has supreme value from the religious point of 
view. Attempts are no doubt made in the Pali canon and 
Visuddhimagga to bring prajna under one of the skandhas. 
In the Sutta pitaka it is allied to vijnana. In the Abhidharma 
it is brought under the samskaras. The Kathavatthu refers 
to and refutes a heretical view which would class one form 
of prajna, divyacaksu, or the heavenly eye, under the 
rupaskandha. In Buddhaghosa’s day sariijna, vijnana 
and prajna represented simple and complex modes of 
human insight. It is the most reasonable interpretation. 

of the impurity of the bodv, of universal nothingness, to such a degree that 
the ascetic should see a woman as she really is, as a skeleton furnished with 
nerves and flesh, as an illusion made up of carnal desire. Mind will thus 
be freed from love, hatred and from every passion.” { Transactions of the 
Third International Congress of Religions, vol. ii., p. 41.) 

1 Tatratatrabhinandinl. 

* Cittadhlno dharmo dharmadhlno bodhib. 



424 INDIAN PHILOSOPHY 

The skandhas represent the empirical point of view and 
lay stress on the knowledge the individual has when he 
regards himself as a separate entity. When the individual 
nature is transformed into unity with the whole, prajna 
displaces the empirical knowledge. The unregenerate culti- 
vate vijnana, while the regenerate develop prajna. There is 
a steady growth from sense-cognition to true insight. The 
two are not independent, but the latter is an expansion of 
the earlier. Prajna terminates in bodhi or enlightenment. 

Mental culture is not so much a suppression of the 
senses as a cultivation of them to see the truth. In the 
Indriyabhavana Sutta Buddha asks a pupil of Parasarya 
how his master teaches the culture of sense. The answer 
is given that the senses are trained to the extent when 
they fail to fulfil their functions. The eye sees no object 
and the ear hears no sound. Buddha rejoins that this 
would mean that the blind and the deaf have their senses 
best cultivated. A true sense-culture means a training of 
the senses so as to discriminate all forms of sense-con- 
sciousness and estimate their real worth. Spiritual insight 
is an expansion and development of intellectual vijnana 
and sense-perception. Buddha seems to admit the reality 
of an absolute which we intuit in the state of prajna. 
“ Serene, pure, radiant lookest thou, Sariputta, whence 
comest thou ? ” “I have been alone, Ananda, in rapture 
of thought . . . till I rose above perception of the world 
without into an infinite sphere of cognition, and this again 
melted into nothing. . . . Insight came, and I discerned 
with the celestial vision the way of the world, the tendencies 
of men, and their coming to be, past, present and yet to 
come. And all this arose in me and passed without one 
thought of ego-making or of mine-making.” On this 
insight into a transcendent reality only a philosophy like 
that of the Upanisads can be built. Buddha shrank from 
it, for systematic philosophy had to wait for a later day. 
He gives us only a series of standpoints and shrewd 
psychological observations. 

While the previous stage refers to prajna or insight, we 
have next dhyana, or meditation, with its result of tran- 
quillity or samadhi. Dhyana is highest contemplation, and 



ETHICAL IDEALISM OF BUDDHISM 425 


takes the place of prayer in Buddhism. This aspect of 
early Buddhism is developed in the Hinayana school. 
Dhyana has four stages: the first, of gladness and joy 
arising from a life of solitude accompanied by insight, reflec- 
tion, contemplation and inquiry, and freed from all sensu- 
ality ; the second, of elation, and internal calm and a deep 
peace of mind, without any conscious reflection ; the third, 
of the total absence of all passions and prejudices, where 
atmamoha, or lust of self, is completely stilled ; and the 
fourth, of self-possession and complete tranquillity, without 
care and joy, for all that gives joy or care is put aside . 1 
Dhyana is the steady endeavour to bring the mind into 
harmony with all that is. It is a deliberate effort to 
eliminate egotism and be lost in the truth. A part of the 
daily life of the members of the Buddhist sangha consists 
in the practice of contemplations. The modes of training 
the heart and the mind are borrowed from the prevailing 
beliefs. We are asked to cherish the moods of loving-kind- 
ness (maitrl), compassion (karuna), cheerfulness (mudita), 
and impartiality (upeksa). These are the four sublime 
moods or Brahma viharas. They are the systematic 
attempts to make the sentiments of love, sympathy, etc., 
extend over ever-widening groups till the whole world of 
humanity, nay, of sentient beir.gs is included. The forty 
subjects of meditation and the four ecstatic moods tend to 
diminish passion and lead us from the dominion of the 
senses. A life of meditation of the highest restores us to 
the real truth. We cannot help asking what is the object 
on which dhyana or spiritual contemplation is to be 
exercised. 

There is no reference to grace in Buddhism. It is only 
a question of self-development. Man can develop by 

' Childers states the idea thus : " The priest concentrates his mind 

upon a single thought. Gradually his soul becomes filled with a super- 
natural ecstasy and serenity, while his mind still reasons upon and investigates 
the Subject chosen for contemplation ; this is the first jhana. Still fixing 
his thought upon the same subject, be then frees his mind from reasoning 
and investigation, while ecstasy and serenity remain, and this is the second 
jh.lna. Next, bis thoughts still fixed as before, he divests himself of ecstasy 
and attains the third jhana, which is a state of tranquil serenity. Lastly 
he passes to the fourth jhana, in which the mind, exalt'd and purifed, i- 
indifferent to all emotions alike of pleasure and of pain.” i,Ot:!hnary. p \ r ) 



426 INDIAN PHILOSOPHY 

effort and training a strength and a virtue that can render 
him independent of all things. None can prevail against 
him if he conquers himself. “ Not even a god can change 
into defeat the victory of a man who has vanquished him- 
self.” 1 Because Buddha demands love of humanity and 
discipline of mind independent of a religious sanction, there 
are people who exclaim that Gautama Buddha was the 
positivist August Comte born 2,000 years too soon ! 

Both the Buddhist dhyana and the yoga doctrine emphasise 
the physical and hygienic conditions necessary for mental 
training. Control of the body is a preparation for enlighten- 
ment. Tapas is replaced by psychological exercises leading 
to spiritual insight. Exercises of spiritual abstraction 
whereby the individual withdraws his powers from the 
external world and realises the stillness of the ego are 
common to all yogic theories. In the four states of dhyana 
we have a progressive and methodical abstraction from the 
plurality of the phenomenal world. Dhyana is not a 
desultory reverie, but a set exercise to heighten the powers 
of mind by closing the avenues of sense. M. Poussin 
says : “ The mind once concentrated and strengthened by 
exercise with the clay disk, or any other exercise of the 
same kind, is successively to abandon its contents and its 
categories. The ecstatic starts from a state of contempla- 
tion, coupled with reasoning and reflection ; he abandons 
desire, sin, distractions, discursiveness, joy, hedonic feeling ; 
he goes beyond any notion of matter, of contact, of differ- 
ence ; through meditation on void space, knowledge with- 
out object, contemplation of nothingness, he passes into the 
stage where there is neither consciousness nor unconscious- 
ness, and finally he realises the actual disappearance of 
feeling and notion. It is a lull in the psychological life 
which coincides with perfect hypnosis.” 2 We cannot say 
with any definiteness or certainty whether greater freedom 
of mind and clarity of imagination can be obtained by a 
shutting out of sense impressions or a hypnotic exhaustion 
of the outer senses. Modern science in tliis department is 
still in its infancy. Buddhism along with the rest of 
Indian thought believed it to be so, and the belief persists 
1 Oharamapada, 105. 1 The Way to Nirvaya, p. 164. 



ETHICAL IDEALISM OF BUDDHISM 427 


even to-day. It is generally accepted in India that when 
mental states are checked and sense impressions suspended, 
the empirical self is reduced to the lowest point and the 
universal self shines forth. The ideals of yogic practice 
are different in different metaphysical systems. In the 
Upanisads it is union with or realisation of Brahman. 
In Patanjali’s Yoga it is insight into truth. In Buddhism 
it is attainment of the Bodhisattva condition or realisa- 
tion of the emptiness of the world. 

Buddha did not consider every trance to be necessarily 
good. It must aim at the right end, namely, the eradica- 
tion of desire. Buddha realised that there were those 
who took to yogic exercises to acquire supernatural powers. 
Buddha refined the practice by telling them that even such 
powers could be acquired only through the practice of 
righteousness and wisdom . 1 Buddha forbade his disciples 
to work miracles for display. Acquisition of supernatural 
powers does not confer any spiritual advantage. The 
yogic beliefs of Buddhism are to be seen clearly in the 
Lamaism of Tibet. 

The eightfold path is sometimes divided into four stages, 
where each is marked by the breaking of the fetters, which 
are ten in number, which bind man to earth. The first 
of these fetters is the delusion of a personal self (satkaya- 
drsti), the mother of all egoism. The realisation that 
there is no permanent self, that what is, is only an aggre- 
gation of skandhas, may tempt us into the path of self- 
indulgence and scepticism. This has to be guarded against. 
The second obstacle is called scepticism (vieikitsa). It is 
a cloak for idleness or vice. We must also give up the 
belief in the efficacy of the purificatory rites and cere- 
monies. Rituals do not help us to free ourselves from 
lust, hatred and ignorance. He who is released from the 
delusion of the ego, from doubt of Buddha and his doctrines, 
and from belief in ceremonial rites, is said to have entered 
the first stage in the noble path. He is called the Srota- 
panna, or he who has got into the stream. About this state 
Dhammapada says : “ Better than sovereignty over the 

earth, better than going to heaven, better than lordship 

■ See Althankheya Sutta, S.B.E., vol. xi. 



428 INDIAN PHILOSOPHY 

over all worlds, is the reward of the first step in holiness.” 1 * 
The two next obstacles to be overcome are sensuality 
(kama) and malevolence (pratiglia). When these are con- 
quered he attains the second stage of the noble path. He 
is Sakrdagamin, or he who will once be re-born in the 
world of men. The deficiencies are minimised though not 
abolished. Those w r ho have reduced the cardinal errors of 
lust, resentment and glamour return to the world once 
before they attain final release. When these two impedi- 
ments are completely destroyed he becomes Anagamin. 
Though he is not free from all error, there is no more 
chance of falling backward. The impediments yet to be 
overcome are craving (raga) for material and immaterial 
pleasures in this world or another, pride (mana), self- 
righteousness (auddhatya), and ignorance of the true 
nature of things. When these fetters are burst he reaches 
the goal, becomes an arhat 3 (literally worthy), and attains 
the blessedness of nirvana. The causes of his suffering 
are exhausted and the impurities are washed aw'ay. He is 
no more subject to rebirth. The arhat condition is a 
state of blissful sanctification. Nirvana is the goal of 
Buddhism, and arhatship terminates in it. ) Upadhi£esa- 
nirvana is the arhatvaphala, or the fruition of sanctification. 
The arhat is still a man. It is when he dies that he ceases 
to exist. Then is the oil in the lamp of life spilt and the seed 
of existence withered. He vanishes from creation and attains 
Parinirvana, or the annihilation of the elements of being.3 

The Buddhist morality is more individual than social. 
In our lives we have to imitate the example of Buddha. 
Stress is not laid on convention and authority. When 
Buddha was asked by Ananda about instructions touching 
the order, he answered : " Be ye lamps unto yourselves ; 
be ye a refuge to yourselves ; betake yourselves to no 
external refuge ; hold fast to the truth as a lamp ; hold 
fast as a refuge to the truth ; look not for refuge to any- 
one besides yourselves.” 

1 Phamnrp.'.da 178. 

1 Arhat is a common woui used in pro -TJurldhistir times for anyone 
who attains the ideal of Ins r 1 . 

3 See 'Ike Religious Systems 0/ the Wei Id, pp. 148, 149. 



ETHICAL IDEALISM OF BUDDHISM 429 

Conduct is broadly distinguished into well-being and 
ill-being. The former springs out of unselfishness and 
results in acts of love and compassion, the latter is rooted 
in egoism and results in acts of malice, etc. Actions become 
good by the avoidance of the ten transgressions ; the three 
bodily sins, of murder, theft and adultery ; the four sins 
of speech, lying, slander, abuse, and idle talk ; and the three 
sins of mind, covetousness, hatred and error. We have 
also other classifications of sinful conduct. Sensuality, 
desire for rebirth, ignorance, metaphysical speculation, are 
four kinds of sinful conduct. Sometimes the whole is 
summed up in simple formulas, apparently negative, but 
really positive, which say, kill no living thing, do not steal, 
do not commit adultery, do not speak untruths, do not 
drink intoxicating liquors. These rules emphasise the 
need for self-control in five different directions. Positively 
they mean control anger, the desire for material posses- 
sions, the lusts of the flesh, cowardice and malevolence 
(the chief cause of untruthful ness), and the craving for 
unwholesome excitement. The result of this self-control 
will be to bring happiness to himself and others and develop 
positive virtue. Control of anger leads to growth of gentle- 
ness, control of covetousness leads to the spread of charity, 
control of lust to purity in love. Sometimes the ideal 
virtues are stated to be ten in number. Charity, purity of 
conduct, patience, strenuousness, meditation, intelligence, 
employment of right means, resoluteness, strength and 
knowledge. Sometimes the ethical discipline of siksa is 
put down in the three rules of morality, culture and insight. 
In Milinda we find that good conduct, perseverance, mind- 
fulness, meditation and wisdom constitute the virtuous 
life. 1 The codes of duties of the Upanisads and early 
Buddhism are not different in essentials. - 

We may turn to the motive or inspiration of moral life. 
Avoidance of pain and quest of pleasure are the springs of 
all conduct. Nirvana is the highest sukha or bliss. Modern 
hedonists contend that happiness is found in the increase 

■ ii. i. 7-15. 

» Suicide is wrong, for putting an end to life is no cure for the illusion 
of the ego. 



430 INDIAN PHILOSOPHY 

of life in its length and breadth. The Buddhists claim 
that it lies in the dissolution of the conditions of selfishness 
and ignorance which lead to renewed existence. Eternal 
salvation is what Buddha sets before man at the end of 
the narrow path of knowledge, virtue and austerity, and 
not any small end of wealth, conquest or power. It is 
confusion of mind which leads the self to identity itself 
with small interests. This confusion is common in the 
world. “ I do not see any living being in the three worlds 
who does not prefer his own self to anything.” 1 Selfish- 
ness is caused by imperfect understanding and consequent 
confusion of the bounds of individuality. Unselfishness is 
the result of the right perception of the truth. The true 
good is attainable only by a suppression of the subjectivity 
of self and the development of the universal consciousness. 
It is a sublimated selfishness that tells us that we should 
give up our selfish craving. Compassion for the suffering 
of others is the impelling motive of altruism. We are all 
comrades in suffering, subject to a common doom. All 
creatures in heaven and earth, even those lower than our- 
selves in the scale of being, are subject to the law of moral 
perfection. The whole existence, divine, human and animal, 
in all its spheres is linked together by the chain of moral 
causation. It is this community of nature which underlies 
the system of Buddha, though it is not explicitly recognised 
anywhere. The raw material of human nature is not 
completely egoistic. Unselfish conduct is not unnatural. 
We need not think that egoistic action is the only intelli- 
gible action. To say that each individual is outside of the 
other is a half truth. There is also a vital and organic 
union of all beings. The development of this uniting con- 
sciousness or the attainment of fullness of knowledge, peace 
and joy is nirvana. Freedom is the expansion into the 
universal consciousness, the widening out of our feeling 
and sympathy for all that is. “ The disciple lets his mind 
pervade one quarter of the world with thoughts of love, 
and so the second . . . and thus the whole wide 
world. ...” 1 While, strictly speaking, Buddhist morality 
has no supernatural sanction, still for the ordinary man 

1 Sariiyutta, i. 3 Mahasudassana Suttanta. 



ETHICAL IDEALISM OF BUDDHISM 43] 

the hope of heaven to be reached after death is kept quite 
intact. 

The conditions of virtue aie independent of outer things. 
It makes little difference what you are, prince or peasant, 
for all are imperfect. A true and honest life alone counts. 
Buddhism insists not so much on the performance of duty 
as on the transformation of the whole being. Those arrayed 
like Solomon in all his glory, magnificent in physique and 
proud in intellect, are not the really great. Without 
humility, charity and love, life is death at the core. 

The charge of intellectualism is repeated against the 
ethics of Buddhism. Knowledge is no doubt emphasised, 
for ignorance is said to be the root cause of sorrow and 
suffering. It is the possession of truth that brings about 
a reform in mind. Selfish desire cannot arise in a mind 
enlightened by true wisdom. So the liberated soul is called 
Buddha, the knower. 1 Virtue is knowledge of the good. 
Yet Buddha recognises that this knowledge cannot dissolve 
the body built of karma, though it prevents the building 
of fresh karma. We have also to realise that by know- 
ledge Buddha did not mean mere intellectual learning. It 
is not acquaintance with theological dogmas or esoteric 
mysteries, but knowledge of which morality is the necessary 
condition. It is a life of truth which we can acquire only 
by clearing the soul of the darkening influence of passion 
and impulse. Knowledge is not something to be packed 
away in some corner of our brain, but what enters into 
our being, colours our emotion, haunts our soul, and is as 
close to us as life itself. It is the over-mastering power 
which through the intellect moulds the whole personality, 
trains the emotions and disciplines the will. That doctrinal 
belief is not what is meant by knowledge is brought out 

1 *' Here Brahmanical speculation anticipates Buddhism in diction as 
well as in thought . . . when he who has come to know the Atman is men- 
tioned in the ^atapathabrahmana as ‘ delivered,’ the word then used for 
knowing is that word (pratibiuldha) , which also signifies awaking, the word 
which the Buddhists are accustomed to use when they describe how Buddha 
has in a solemn hour under the asvattha tree gained the knowledge of the 
delivering truth or is awake to the delivering truth ; the same word from 
which also the name ‘Buddha,’ that is, the ‘knowing/ the * awake/ 13 
derived.” (Oldenberg : Buddha, p. 52.) 



432 


INDIAN PHILOSOPHY 


in Tevijja Sutta. 1 To the question, What shall I do to 
be saved ? Buddha gives the answer in the spirit of the 
Upanisads. Salvation consists in the overcoming of selfish- 
ness, theoretically the illusion of the ego, and practically the 
craving of self. The acquisition of truth, Buddha again and 
again repeats, depends on these conditions : (i) Sraddha, 

or faith ; 2 (2) Darsana, or sight. Mere faith will not 
do. Truths acquired at second-hand on the authority of 
other people remain external to our minds, and do not 
become part of our lives. “ Now, 0 monks, are you going 
to say we respect the master and, out of respect for him, 
we believe this and that ? You must not say so. Is not 
what you will say to be true, that exactly which you have 
by yourselves seen, known and apprehended ? ” 3 (3) Bha- 

vana, or cultivation. It is meditation or pondering over 
truth unceasingly till we practically become one with it 
and live it. The higher life cannot be entered upon by 
the undisciplined, and yet the crown of human life is the 
direct perception of the truth which makes all false notions 
impossible. Aristotle closes his ethics with contemplation 
as the ultimate good, after giving us a long survey of rela- 
tive goods. Buddha looks upon prajna as the highest 
possession, but takes care to add that prajna without love 
and benevolence is impossible, and even if possible, quite 
barren. Mystic contemplation without practical goodness 
is not perfection. 

Another complaint made against Buddhist ethics is 
that it is ascetic. If asceticism means suppression of 
desire, then Buddhist ethics is ascetic. Desire builds the 
house of existence. It is its nature to flee endlessly and 
restlessly from all that it has. It knows no peace. In a 
lower form it is unregenerate impulse, craving, or tanha, 
while the rationalised tanha is desire. The extinction of 
tanha is possible only by the extirpation of desire. This 
can be achieved by strenuous volition, or chanda. Buddha 
does not advocate mere passivity. For the wrong desires 
cannot be suppressed by quiescence, but only by a strong 
will and purpose. 

1 iii. 1. 2. 

1 Majjhima, i. 


* Majjhima, i. 7 r. 

< Dliamniapada, 183. 



ETHICAL IDEALISM OF BUDDHISM 438 

Buddha insists not on an abolition of will or a turning 
away from the world, but on a hot contest with desire, an 
active wrestling with evil. “ If the critic would dwell 
more on the positive tendencies in Buddhist ethics, he 
might discern under the outward calm of mien of the 
Buddhist sage, in literature and art, a passion of emotion 
and will not paralysed or expurgated, but rendered subser- 
vient to and diffused around deep faith and high hope. 
For there is no doctrine, not even excepting Platonism, that 
sees in life, in the life that now is, greater possibilities of 
perfection. Nor is there any system, not excepting that of 
the Christian, which sees in the evolution of human love a 
more exalted transcendence of the lower forms of that 
emotion.” 1 Buddha does not want a suppression of emo- 
tion and desire, but asks for the cultivation of true love 
for all creation. This glowing emotion must fill the whole 
universe and result in an outflow of abounding goodwill. 
“ Our mind shall not waver, no vile speech will we utter ; 
we will abide tender and compassionate, loving in heart, 
void of secret malice ; and we will be ever suffusing such a 
one with the rays of our loving thought, and from him 
forthgoing we will be ever suffusing the whole world with 
thought of love far-reaching, grown great and beyond 
measure, void of ill-will and bitterness.’” The legendary 
stories contained in the Jatakas illustrate the deep love 
and curnpa.-sion exhibited by Buddha in his previous 
lives. 3 Buddha’s doctrine is the middle way between 
luxury and asceticism, and so he shrank from all excess 
and avoided extremes. He does not ask us to suppress 
desire but only divert it. The same conclusion may be 
reinforced by the Buddhist analysis of feeling. A state of 
consciousness is never good in itself, but good or bad by 

1 Mrs. Rhys Daeids: j.R.A.S., iSgS, p. 55. 

" Majjhiina Xik.lyu, 21. 

3 In Tumnatha’s History 0 / Indian Buddhism we have the story of the 
monk Aryasangha, who saw a certain dog snapping and barking at people, 
with the lower part of its body eaten and gnawed by v.ornis. Moved by 
compassion, Aryasamgha thought within himself, If I do not rid this dog 
of these worms, the poor creature will die ; if, however, I take the worms 
from off her and throw them away, the worms will die." Wherefore he 
resolved to cut some iicsff lioin his own body upon which to put the worms, 
and did 50 ’ 



434 INDIAN PHILOSOPHY 

its effects. If the effect is well-being, we have sukha 
(pleasure) ; if ill-being, we have duhkha (pain) ; if neither, 
we have a neutrally toned feeling. All creatures aim at well- 
being ; only they are mostly satisfied with relative 
well-being. A few there are w r ho aspire after absolute 
well-being or happiness. Buddha asks us to suppress the 
will to live on the low'er plane and cultivate the will to live 
well and gain the ultimate peace. If quietude and calm 
are admired, it is because they are aids to concentration. 
Will is to be controlled and not repressed. Without a 
disciplined exercise of the will nothing great can be accom- 
plished. When a young prince asks him how long it would 
take to graduate in his doctrine, Buddha points out that, 
as in the art of riding, even there everything depends on 
whether the pupil brings the five conditions of confidence, 
health, merit, energy and intelligence. 1 

We are asked to put down not all desires, but only the 
wrong desires by a strenuous effort of will.* “ I preach 
asceticism in as much as I preach the burning away of all 
conditions of the heart that are evil. One who so does is 
the true ascetic.” Besides, the ascetic discipline of Buddha 
has in view the mind’s inward landscape, and not the body’s 
outer fortunes. As a matter of fact, Buddha allows the 
care of the body, though not attachment to it. “ Have 
you ever at any time been hit in battle by an arrow ? ” 
“ Yes, I have.” “ And was the wound anointed with 
ointment, smeared with oil and bandaged w r ith a strip of 
fine cloth ? ” “ Yes, it was.” “ Did you love your wound ? ” 
“ No.” “ In exactly the same way the ascetics do not 
love their bodies ; but without being attached to them, they 
take their bodies in order to advance in the religious life.” 3 

Buddha allowed decent dress, regular food, shelter and 
medical treatment, even to the Bhiksus. He knew that 
bodily torture was injurious to strength of mind, so neces- 
sary for the understanding of philosophical truths. Buddha 
refined asceticism and discriminated between the true and 
the false. He condemned the morbid exaggerations of 
certain ugly types of asceticism. A knife if it be caught 

■ Majjhima, 65. • Mahlparinibbana Sutta, vii. 

1 Milinda, p. 73. 



ETHICAL IDEALISM OF BUDDHISM 435 


by the blade cuts the hand. False asceticism leads to the 
downward path. To him asceticism does not mean sever- 
ing the ties of life, but the rooting out of egoism. The 
ascetic is not he who punishes the body, but he who purifies 
the soul. Asceticism is only detachment from the things 
that distract our desires, “ the cares of the world and the 
deceitfulness of riches and the lusts of outer things.” In 
the Upanisads we find that Naciketas dismisses with 
supreme contempt the transient pleasures of the world in 
his eagerness to know the Brahman who lives beyond death, 
dwelling in the depths. Insistence on renunciation is 
necessary for all healthy life. When the nun Gautami 
asked Buddha to teach her the quintessence of the dharma, 
he said : "Of whatsoever teaching thou art sure that it 
leads to passion, and not to peace ; to pride, and not to 
humility ; to the desiring of much, and not the desiring 
of little ; to the love of society, and not to the love of 
solitude ; to idleness, and not to earnest striving ; to a 
mind hard to pacify, and not a mind easy to pacify — that, 
0 Gautami, that is not dharma.” 1 Meditation in solitude 
was advised as means for cultivating spiritual calm and 
detachment. 

It is not possible for Buddhism to discard its past. 
From the early Vedic times there had been in India ascetic 
tempers who had cut themselves adrift from the responsi- 
bilities of life and wandered free. We have seen in the 
Upanisads how, in their love for the supreme, some 
“ relinquish the desire for children, the struggle for wealth, 
the pursuit of worldly weal, and go forth as mendicants.” 
The Brahmanical codes recognised the right of these to 
sever themselves from the duties of life and the observance 
of rites. The ideal man of India before whom the prince 
and the peasant bow is the ascetic who walks about alms- 
bowl in hand, through streets and alleys, from house to 
house, without uttering a word or making a request. Of 
the mendicants, Jacobi says : " There can be no doubt 
from the laws laid down respecting them that they had a 
recognised position about the eighth century b.c.” The 
Buddhist Bhiksus are the mendicants living on alms, 

» Dahlke : Buddhist Essays, p. 215. 



436 INDIAN PHILOSOPHY 

taking the vow of poverty, and devoting themselves to the 
spreading of the gospel of Buddha. Of course, Buddha did 
not expect all men to become ascetics. He divides men 
into two classes, those who are still attached to the world 
and its life, upasakas, or laymen, and those who by self- 
mortification are delivered from it, £ramanas, or ascetics. 1 
Despite his great respect for worldly virtues, Buddha 
believed that the fulfilment of worldly duties is not directly 
helpful to salvation. " Full of hindrances is household life, 
a path defiled by passion ; free as the air is the life of him 
who has renounced all worldly things. How difficult is it 
for the man who dwells at home to live the higher life in 
all its fullness, in all its purity, in all its bright per- 
fection 1 Let me then cut off my hair and beard, let 
me clothe myself in the orange-coloured robes, and let me 
go forth from a household life into the homeless state.” 1 
There is no consistency, however, on this point, for accord- 
ing to Majjhima Nikaya a man may attain nirvana without 
being a monk. Though Buddha condemned morbid ascetic 
practices, it is a surprise to find that the discipline demanded 
of the Buddhist brethren is more severe in some points 
than any referred to in the Brahmanical texts. Though 
theoretically Buddha admits the possibility of gaining 
salvation without austere asceticism, still in practice it 
seems to be necessary for almost all according to him. 

Sangha is the Buddhistic brotherhood, which the dis- 
ciples join in order to realise the perfect life. It is a 
religious order to which members are admitted on the per- 
formance of certain vows and the profession of faith. It 
is open to all without exception. In the beginning Buddha 
took an unfavourable view of women. When Ananda 
asked him how a man should act in the presence of a 
woman, Buddha answered : " Avoid looking at her ... if it 
is necessary to look, do not speak to her ; if it be necessary 
to speak, then keep wide awake.” 3 When the widowed 
queen of Suddhodana decided to adopt the life of the 
hermitage and came to Buddha for conversion, accom- 
panied by the wives of 500 princes, Buddha refused three 

• Cf. the different orders of St. Francis. » Tevijja Sutta, i. 47. 

8 Mahlparimbbana Sutta, v. 23. 



ETHICAL IDEALISM OF BUDDHISM 437 


times, since their admission would perplex the minds of 
many who had entered the order. When again they came 
with bleeding feet and dusty dress, Ananda asked : “ Are 
Buddhas born into the world only for the benefit of men ? 
Assuredly it is for the benefit of women also.” Thereafter 
they were admitted. Since earthly suffering affected all, 
the way out of it must be open to all who choose to 
accept it. Only those afflicted with sickness and disease 
and confirmed criminals, also those whose admission would 
interfere with existing rights, such as soldiers, debtors and 
slaves, sons whose parents do not consent, and children 
were kept out. The Sangha is an organised brotherhood 
formed of monks and mendicants. The ascetics of the Brah- 
manical religion did not possess any such organised corpora- 
tion. The spirit of proselytism consciously attempted by 
the Buddhists is responsible for this organised action. The 
Buddhist monk has no power to save or condemn. He is 
not a worker of miracles or a mediator between God and 
man, but only a leader. The Sangha contains both lay 
members and monks. While the lay member assents to 
the doctrine, the monk is the missionary. The rules of 
the Buddhist Sangha were borrowed from the Brahmanical 
codes, though they were adapted to missionary pur- 
poses. The relation between Buddha and his disciple or 
between the monks and the followers is one of teacher and 
pupil. 

There is a good deal of misconception about Buddha’s 
attitude to caste. He does not oppose the institution, but 
adopts the Upanisad standpoint. The Brahmin or the 
leader of society is not so much a Brahmin by birth as by 
character In the time of Buddha the caste system was in a 
confused condition, where the distinctions were based on birth 
rather than on qualities. “ The Brahmin who has removed 
all sinfulness, who is free from haughtiness, from impurity, 
self-restrained, an accomplished master of knowledge, who 
has fulfilled the duties of holiness, such a Brahmin justly 
calls himself a Brahmin. He that gives way to anger and 
feels hatred, a wicked man, a hypocrite, he that embraces 
wrong views and is deceitful, such a one is an outcast, 
and he that has no compassion for living things.” “ Not 



438 


INDIAN PHILOSOPHY 


by birth is one a Brahmin, not by birth is one an outcast ; 
by deeds is one a Brahmin, by deeds is one an outcast.” 1 
All men had the power to become perfect. Buddha him- 
self is an example of that perfection of knowledge to which 
any man might attain by meditation and self-control. It 
is idle to think that certain men were doomed to helotry 
and infamy and others to virtue and wisdom. So members 
of all castes were admitted into the monastic order. Any- 
body could embrace Buddhism and attain to the highest 
rank by becoming a member of the Sahgha. In this way 
Buddha undermined the spirit of caste, which later developed 
inhuman practices. But this is not foreign to the Brah- 
manical theory, which also looked upon the highest status 
of the Sannyasin as above caste. We cannot say that 
Buddha abolished caste, for the religion of Buddha is an 
aristocratic one. It is full of subtleties that only the 
learned could understand, and Buddha has always in view 
the Samanas and the Brahmanas. His first converts were 
the Brahmin priests and the rich youth of Benares. We 
cannot say that Buddha effected any social revolution. 
Even birth in a Brahmin family Buddha allows to be a reward 
for merit. 2 He was a spiritual reformer in that he won 
for the poor and the lowly a place in the kingdom of God. 
“ The still very prevalent notion that Buddhism and Jainism 
were reformatory movements, and that more especially 
they represented the revolt against the tyranny of caste, 
is quite erroneous. They were only a protest against the 
caste exclusiveness of the Brahmanical ascetics ; but caste 
as such, and as existing outside their doors, was fully 
acknowledged by them. Even inside their orders admis- 
sion, though professedly open to all, was at first practi- 
cally limited to the higher castes. It is also significant for 
the attitude of these orders to the Brahmanic institutions 
of the country that, though in spiritual matters their so- 
called lay adherents were bound to their guidance, yet 
with regard to ceremonies, such as those of birth, marriage 
and death, they had to look for service to the old Brahmanic 


1 See Vasala Sutta, Vasettha Sutta, and Dhammapada, chap. xxvi. 

• See Hardy: Manual of Buddhism, p. 446. 



ETHICAL IDEALISM OF BUDDHISM 439 


priests.” 1 * 3 Buddha was not a social reformer. He felt 
most intensely that suffering was bound up with selfish- 
ness, and he preached a moral and mental discipline 
designed to root out the conceit of self. Buddha’s whole 
spirit was other-worldly, and he had not the burning enthu- 
siasm for the earthly kingdom so necessary for a social 
reformer or a national leader. “ Buddha’s spirit was a 
stranger to that enthusiasm, without which no one can 
pose as the champion of the oppressed against the oppressor. 
Let the state and society remain what they are ; the reli- 
gious man who as a monk has renounced the world has 
no part in its cares and occupations. Caste has no value 
for him, for everything earthly has ceased to affect his 
interest ; but it never occurs to him to exercise his influence 
for its abolition or for the mitigation of the severity of its 
rules for those who have lagged behind in worldly sur- 
roundings.” 1 In the world of thought both Upanisads 
and Buddhism protested against the rigours of caste. Both 
allowed the highest spiritual dignity to the poor and the 
humble, but neither rooted out the Vedic institutions and 
practices, though on this point Buddhism is a little more 
successful than Brahmanism. But the passion for social 
reform was practically unknown to even the best minds of 
those times. Democracy is a modern motive of social 
reform. 

We have already said that Buddha did not interfere 
with the domestic ritual which continued to be performed 
according to the Vedic rules. 3 So far as the authority of 
the Veda on doctrinal matters is concerned, Buddha does 
not accept it. As a general rule he denounces all exoteric 
or secret doctrines : “ O disciples, there are three to whom 
secrecy belongs and not openness — to women ... to 
priestly wisdom ... to false doctrine.” 4 "I have preached 
the truth without making any distinction between exoteric 
and esoteric doctrines, for in respect of the truths, Ananda, 
the Tathagata has no such thing as the closed fist of a 

1 Hoemle: Calcutta Review, 1898, p. 320. 

* Oldenberg : Buddha, pp. 153 - 154 - 

3 See Bhandarkar : A Peep into the Early History 0} India. 

< Aiiguttara Nikaya. 



440 INDIAN PHILOSOPHY 

teacher who keeps something back ” 1 Buddha himself 
was a reviler of the Vedas. He protested against that part 
of the Vedas which countenanced animal sacrifices. At any 
rate, such is the opinion of Jayadeva, the author of Gita- 
govinda, and Ramacandra Bharati, the author of Bhaktisataka, 
otherwise called Buddhasataka. 


XV 

Karma and Rebirth 

The law of karma is not imposed from without, but is 
worked into our very nature. The formation of mental 
habits, the increasing proneness to evil, the hardening 
influence of repetition which undermines the effective free- 
dom of the self, whether we know it or not, are compre- 
hended under the law of karma. We cannot escape from 
the effects of our acts. The past in a real sense produces 
the present and the future. The law of karma is the prin- 
ciple working out justice in human relations. “ It is 
through a difference in their karma that men are not all 
alike. But some are long lived, some short lived, some 
healthy, and some sickly, etc.” 2 Without this explanation 
men would feel themselves to be the victims of an immense 
injustice. It also helps to make the sufferer resigned, 
because he feels that through suffering he is wiping 
out an old debt. It makes the enjoyer courteous, for he 
must do good again to deserve it. When a persecuted 
disciple came to Buddha with broken head and streaming 
wounds, Buddha told him : ” Suffer it to be so, 0 Arhat 
. . . you are now feeling results of your karma that might 
have cost you centuries of suffering in purgatory.” It 
insists on individual responsibility and the reality of a 
future life. It recognises that the retribution of sin depends 
on the status of the sinner. If a man weak in mind and 
morals does an evil deed, it may lead him to the inferno. 
If a good man does it he may escape with a small pain in 
this life. “ It is as if a man were to put a lump of salt 

1 Mahaparinibbana Sutta. 

» Wilinda. Sii" Majjhima, iii. 203, and Buddhagho?a: Atthasalini, p. S 3 . 



ETHICAL IDEALISM OF BUDDHISM 441 


into a small cup of water, the water would be made salt 
and undrinkable. But if the same lump of salt were put 
into the river Ganges, the water of the Ganges would not 
be perceptibly tainted.” 1 

The theory of karma is much older than Buddhism, 
though it gets a logical justification in the philosophy of 
becoming. Men are temporary links in a long chain of 
causes and effects where no link is independent of the rest. 
The history of an individual does not begin at his birth, 
but has been for ages in the making. 

When karma becomes the supreme principle superior 
to gods and men, it is difficult to assign any place to the 
initiative and endeavour of man. If everything that 
happens is determined by it, it is hard to see why the indi- 
vidual should take thought of what he does. He cannot 
but act in harmony with the law. Salvation is another 
name for acquiescence in the course of things. Such a 
conception again and again crops up in the history of 
thought. The Greek held that there was an inexorable 
destiny higher than man or god which could not be altered 
by effort or prayer. The same dread fate appears in the 
faith of the Calvinists and the Kismet of the Muslims. 
Nobody can learn even from Buddha if he has not already 
been destined for it or done enough merit to deserve it. 
We admit that Buddha did not give a straight answer to 
the question of freedom, but put it aside as a problem of 
speculation. Yet his system allows the possibility of free 
action and ultimate conquest over the whole law of 
karma . 2 His insistence on energy and endeavour and 
struggle against hate and error is not consistent with a 
denial of freedom. His scheme has a place for repentance, 
or samvega. The following suggestions may enable us to 
reconcile the Buddhis temphasis on karma with freedom. 
The chief argument in support of determination even in 
modern thought is that from causation. Karma, according 
to Buddhism, is not a mechanical principle, but is organic 
in character. The self grows and expands. There is no 
self, but only an evolving consciousness which may be 
spread out in a series of states. Though the present is 

1 Afijrittara Nikjya, i 149. * See Milinda, iv. 8 30-41. 



442 INDIAN PHILOSOPHY 

determined by the past, the future remains open and 
depends on the direction of our will. The determination of 
the present by the past is not, however, a merely mechanical 
one. The law of karma tells us that there is continuity 
between the past and the present, that the present accords 
with the past This does not mean that the present is the 
only possible outcome of the past. “ O priests, if any- 
one says that a man must reap according to his deeds, in 
that case there is no religious life, nor is any opportunity 
offered for the entire extinction of misery. But if anyone 
says, 0 priests, that a reward a man reaps accords with 
his deeds, in that case, O priests, there is a religious life, 
and opportunity is afforded for the entire extinction of 
misery.” 1 A mechanical misinterpretation of the law of 
karma conflicts with the claims of ethics and religion. 

The whole difficulty of the problem is due to the psycho- 
logical orientation of Buddha’s outlook. The analysis of 
the self into a sum of qualities, tendencies and disposi- 
tions, is perfectly legitimate for psychological science with 
its restricted object. For psychology which traces the rise 
and growth of mental presentations and establishes causal 
connexions among them determinism holds. But it can 
never adequately explain the constitution of the unitary 
self. If W’e do not emphasise the subjective factor, the 
principle for which alone mental facts are facts of mind, 
w-e misinterpret the nature of the self. When we isolate it 
from its contents, it becomes a logical abstraction, which is 
not w’hat determines our activities. Our w'hole self at any 
moment is the subject of our activity, and it has in it the 
capacity to transcend its past. The self apart from the 
contents is characterless and barren ; the contents alone 
without the self support perfect determinism, for the con- 
crete self freedom is a fact. To say that nothing happenc 
without a cause is not inconsistent with holding that the 
present state of the self may act as a cause. Buddhism 
only protests against the unscientific view of indeterminism 
which regards freewill as an incalculable force which some- 
how interferes with the orderly working of mind. There is 
more in the world than mechanical law, though there is a 

1 Afiguttara Nikaya, iii. 99. 



ETHICAL IDEALISM OF BUDDHISM 448 


perfect natural history of the thoughts and desires of the 
individual. Karma asserts this orderliness of natural pro- 
cess as well as spiritual growth. It is not intended to 
remove responsibility or invalidate effort, for nothing great 
can be achieved without effort. 

When we attain the highest condition, it is said that 
karma has no effect. All the past deeds with their results 
vanish for ever. The condition of freedom is beyond good 
and evil. It is often said that morality ceases to be of 
transcendental worth when moral acts are looked upon as 
an obstruction to final bliss, in so far as they inevitably 
bring about a reward and maintain the round of existence. 
We must get rid of both merit and demerit to escape from 
this life. All moral conduct is a preparation for the final 
state. When the ideal is realised the struggle ceases. There 
is no effect to be produced in any future existence. It is 
the Upanisud doctrine that whatever the individual who 
has attained liberation does, he does without attachment. 
It is not deeds in themselves that bring about results, but 
deeds springing from selfish desires. The highest condition 
is therefore above moral rules and the operation of the 
law of karma, yet morality has an organic bearing on the end. 

The rotating wheel is the symbol of the series of lives 
determined by the principles of karma. The dissolution of 
the old is the formation of the new. Death is nothing 
but birth cradled in flames. Throughout life there are 
changes. Birth and death are vital changes to which we 
attach names. When the mass of actions meant to receive 
retribution here is exhausted, death occurs. The wheel of 
life presents us with fresh opportunities where, if we choose, 
we may improve our fate. In this wheel are not only men, 
but all living things constantly ascending and descending. 

Buddha, following the Brahmanical theory, presents hell 
for the wicked and rebirth for the imperfect. A heaven 
is also recognised. " On the dissolution of the body after 
death, the well-doer is reborn in some happy state in 
heaven.” 1 Sometimes both heaven and hell are looked 
upon as temporary states before rebirth happens. Early 
Buddhism popularised the conception of rebirth by the 

* Mahaparinibbana, i. 24. 

15 


VOL. I 



444 INDIAN PHILOSOPHY 

tales of the Jatakas relating the previous births of Buddha 
and the many deeds of self-sacrifice by which he prepared 
himself for the final victory over evil in the great conflict 
under the Bo tree. It is said that we can see the infinite 
past of every life if we develop certain supernatural powers. 

There is no such thing in Buddhism as the migration of 
the soul or the passage of an individual from life to life. 
When a man dies his physical organism, which is the basis 
of his psychical dissolves, and so the psychical life comes to 
an end. It is not the dead man who comes to rebirth but 
another. There is no soul to migrate. It is the character 
that continues . 1 Buddhism does not explain the mechanism 
by which the continuity of karma is maintained between 
two lives separated by the phenomenon of death. It 
simply assumes it. We are told that the successive lives 
are linked by a chain of natural causation. The resulting 
character builds up a new individuality which gravitates 
automatically to the state of life for which it is fitted. It 
is said that owing to the strength of karma the conscious- 
ness of the dying man begets or begins a series of states 
of consciousness coupled with a subtle organism, the last 
of which takes up its abode in some matrix . 2 The decisive 
element is generally looked upon as the last thought which 
becomes the essence of the moral and intellectual life of 
the dying man. It is the force which remains as a desire 
for new life when death occurs. There must not only be 
this karma or force resulting from actions, but also upadana, 
or clinging to existence. Since life is a combination, if the 
separated elements do not come together, there w r ould be 
no life. There must be a force at w'ork which tends to 
recombine the scattered elements. Under the pressure of 
this force of attraction called upadana, a new combination 
results. Karma could do nothing without it. Karma is 
an informing principle waiting for its material. 

“ For when in any existence one arrives at the gate of 
death, either in the natural course of things or through 
violence ; and when by a concourse of intolerable, death- 
dealing pains, all the members, both great and small, are 

1 See Abhidharmakosa, iii. 24. 

* See Poussin : The Way to Nirvana, pp. 83-84. 



ETHICAL IDEALISM OF BUDDHISM 445 


loosened and wrenched apart in every joint and ligament ; 
and the body, like a green palm-leaf exposed to the sun 
dries up by degrees ; and the eyesight and the other senses 
fail , and the power of feeling, and the power of thinking 
and vitality are making the last stand in the heart — then 
consciousness residing in that last refuge, the heart con- 
tinues to exist by virtue of karma, otherwise called the 
predispositions. This karma, however, still retains some- 
thing of what it depends on, and consists of such former 
deeds as were weighty, much practised, and are now close at 
hand ; or else this karma creates a reflection of itself or 
of the new mode of life now being entered upon, and it is 
with this as its object that consciousness continues to exist. 

“ Now, while consciousness still subsists, inasmuch as 
desire and ignorance have not been abandoned and the 
evil of the object is hidden by that ignorance, desire inclines 
the consciousness to the object ; and the karma that 
sprang up along with the consciousness impels it toward 
the object. This consciousness being in its series thus 
inclined toward the object by desire and impelled toward 
it by karma, like a man who swings himself over a ditch 
by means of a rope hanging from a tree on the higher bank, 
quits its first resting-place and continues to subsist in 
dependence on objects of sense and other things, and either 
does or does not light on another resting-place created by 
karma. Here the former consciousness, from its passing 
out of existence, is called passing away, and the latter, 
from its being reborn into a new existence, is called rebirth. 
But it is to be understood that this latter consciousness 
did not come to the present existence from the previous 
one, and also that it is only to causes contained in the old 
existence, namely, to karma or predisposition, to inclination, 
. . . that its present appearance is due.” 1 

A distinction is made between animals, ghosts and men on 
the one hand, gods and creatures in hell or demons on the 

1 Buddhaghosa Visuddhimagga, chap, xvii ; see W.B.T., pp. 238-230. 
For an example of an attempt made by mediaeval Buddhist psychology to 
account for rebirth or conception, or patisandhi, we may refer the reader 
to Mr. Aung’s translation of Anuruddha’s Abhidhammatthasafigaha, 
specially the Introductory essay. 



446 


INDIAN PHILOSOPHY 


other . 1 The latter are apparitional and their birth-conscious- 
ness can make for itself a new body out of unorganised matter. 
With animals, ghosts and men birth-consciousness presup- 
poses physical circumstances, and if they are not realised 
at the moment of death, the dying consciousness cannot 
be continued at once into the birth-consciousness of a new 
being. For such being an intermediary existence in a 
short-lived Gandharva form is allowed. This Gandharva, 
like a discarnate spirit, creates at the earliest opportunity 
with the help of conceptional elements the proper embryo. 

The causal explanation of continuity accounts for 
rebirth also. The man who is reborn is the heir of the 
action of the dead man. Yet he is a new being. While 
there is nc permanent identity there is at the same time 
no annihilation or cutting off. The new being is what 
its acts have made it. This theory of the survival of 
karma is suggested in the Upanisads, in the conversation 
between Artabhaga and Yajnavalkya in the Brhadaranyaka 
Upanisad. 

While the main tendency of Buddhism is to make 
karma the surviving element, there are also indications 
that vijnana is sometimes assigned that function. “ All 
that we are is the result of what we have thought.” 
Vijnana is said to constitute in a real sense the substance 
of our soul.” 2 It only shows the close kinship between 
vijnana and karma, thought and will. In the highest 
condition of nirvana we are free from karma as well as 
vijnana, and all sorrow ceases with the disruption of 
personality. Karma keeps going the life process, and when 
it is exhausted individual existence terminates. 


XVI 

Nirvana 

” Now this is the noble truth as to the passing of pain. 
Verily it is the passing away so that no passion remains, 

1 See Aung and Rhys Davids: Compendium o] Philosophy, pp. 137-139. 
> It is interesting to know that even according to Hume personal identity 
arises solely from the " smooth and uninterrupted progress of thought along 
a train of connected ideas.” 



ETHICAL IDEALISM OF BUDDHISM 447 


the giving up, the getting rid of, the emancipation from, 
the harbouring no longer of this craving thirst.” Buddha 
did not face the question of the nature of nirvana directly. 
He felt that his mission was not so much to unveil the secrets 
of blessedness as to win men to its realisation. To him 
the all-absorbing topic was the suffering of life. The word 
nirvana literally means " blowing out ” or “ cooling.” 
Blowing out suggests extinction. Cooling suggests not 
complete annihilation, but only the dying out of hot 
passion. “ The mind released is like the extinction of 
a flame.” 1 These two implications of nirvana are to be 
met with as the negative and the positive sides of the one 
ultimate state of being which cannot be adequately 
described in terms of thought. At any rate, nirvana, 
according to Buddhism, is not the blessed fellowship with 
God, for that is only a perpetuation of the desire for life. 
That Buddha means only the extinction of false desire and 
not all existence comes out from a large number of passages. 
Nirvana is only the destruction of the fires of lust, hatred 
and ignorance. Only in this sense of nirvana can we 
understand Buddha’s attainment of bodhi at the age of 
thirty-five and his spending the remaining forty-five years 
of his life in active preaching and doing good. Sometimes 
a distinction is drawn between two kinds of nirvana : 
(i) Upadhisesa, where only the human passions are 
extinct, and (2) Anupadhisesa, where all being is extinct. 
According to Childers, the former indicates the condition 
of a perfect saint where the five skandhas are still present, 
though the desire which attracts us to being is extinct. 
In the latter we have the cessation of all being consequent 
on the death of the saint. It seems to be a distinction 
between the free whose external life continues and those 
whose external life ceases. Whenever it is said that people 
attain nirvana in this world, the Upadhisesa nirvana is 
meant. It is the arhatship which becomes parinirvana 
when the arhat disappears from the world of the transitory. 


* DIgha Nikaya, ii. 15. See also Majjhima 72, where Buddha compares 
nirvana to the expiring flame which has no more any hay or wood to burn. 
6veta£vatara Upanisad (iv. 19) speaks of the Paramatman as the fire the 
fuel of which has been consumed. See also Nrsimhottaratapaniya Up. 2. 



448 


INDIAN PHILOSOPHY 


The distinction of UpadhEesa and AnupadhEesa thus 
corresponds to that between nirvana and parinirvana, 
dying out and complete dying out. 1 There is no strict 
usage on this question. 2 Even parinirvana cannot mean 
absolute non-being. It only means absolute perfection of 
being. “ Final deliverance is declared by the sage Buddha 
to be nothing other than a flow of faultless states of con- 
sciousness.” 3 It is mental repose free from stress and 
conflict. The suppression of the evil tendencies is accom- 
panied by a simultaneous spiritual progress. Nirvana, 
which is the consummation of the spiritual struggle, is a 
positive blessedness. It is the goal of perfection and not 
the abyss of annihilation. Through the destruction of all 
that is individual in us, we enter into communion with 
the whole universe and become an integral part of the 
great purpose. Perfection is then the sense of oneness with 
all that is, lias ever been and can ever be. The horizon 
of being is extended to the limits of reality. It is a kind 
of existence devoid of egoity, a timeless existence, full of 
"confidence, peace, calm, bliss, happiness, delicacy, purity, 
freshness.” 4 There are passages in Milinda which indi- 
cate that Buddha after parinirvana ceased to exist. “ The 
Blessed One passed away by that kind of passing away 
in which no root remains for the formation of another indi- 
vidual. The Blessed One has come to an end and it can- 
not be pointed out of him that he is here or there. But 
in the body of his doctrine he can be pointed out.” 5 We 
cannot worship Buddha because he is no more, and so we 
worship his relics and doctrines. 6 Nagasena lends colour 
to the conception of nirvana as extinction, or cessation of 
all activities (cittavrttinirodha), cessation of all becoming 
(bhavanirodha), yet we feel that to some early Buddhists 
nirvana meant completeness of being, eternal beatitude 
exalted high above the joys and sorrows of the world. 


> Milinda, ii. 2. 4. * See Oldenberg: Excursus on Nirdnva, iii. 

3 S.S S.S., ii. 4. 21. « Milinda, ii. 2. 9 ; iii. 4. 6 ; ii. 1. 6. 

5 Milinda, i-.i. 5. 10. It suggests the thought embodied in George 

idiot's Choir Invisible, or Maeterlinck’s Blue Bird, the survival in the memory 
of posterity. 

* iv. 1 ; see also Samyutta, i. 



ETHICAL IDEALISM OF BUDDHISM 449 


“ The Tathagata, O Vaccha, when thus liberated from the 
category of materiality, is deep, immeasurable, difficult 
to fathom, like the great ocean.” The nun Khema assures 
Pasenadi of Kosala that death releases the Tathagata from 
the empirical existence of the five skandhas. Sariputta 
lebukes Yamaka for holding the heretical view that a 
monk in whom sin is ended would be cut off. Max 
Muller and Childers, after a systematic examination of 
all passages relating to nirvana, conclude that “ there is 
not one passage which would require that its mean- 
ing should be annihilation.” It is dear that it is the 
false individuality that disappears while the true being 
remains. Even as the rainbow is a mixture of fact and 
imagination, so is individuality a combination of being 
and non-being. The falling raindrops are the rupa, the 
line of light is the nama, and the product of their crossing is 
bhava, or the rainbow, which is an appearance, an illusion. 
But it has something real as its basis that is eternal. 
“ The world rests upon me only in so far as it, as the known, 
stands opposed to me, as the knower. Only the form can 
be known, not that upon which it is based. Wherefore 
the world can only be done away with through knowledge— 
i.e. only in so far as it is form. Only so far as it is form 
does it arise and pass away, is it a becoming, and becoming 
can have an ending. That, however, upon which form is 
based, the elementary — that is being ; and never and 
nowhere can being pass into non-being ; never and nowhere 
can what is eternal come to an end.” 1 Nirvana is an 
eternal condition of being, for it is not a sarhskara, or what 
is made or put together, which is impermanent. It con- 
tinues while its expressions change. This is what lies 
behind the skandhas, which are subject to birth and decay. 
The illusion of becoming is founded on the reality of nirvana. 
Buddha does not attempt to define it, since it is the root 
principle of all, and so is indefinable. It is said that in 
nirvana, which is compared to deep sleep, the soul loses 
its individuality and lapses into the objective whole. Accord- 
ing to the view emphasised in later Mahayana works, 
what is is the bliavanga, or the stream of being. The 

1 Dalilke : Buddhist Essays, p. 258. 



450 INDIAN PHILOSOPHY 

wind of ignorance blows over it and stirs its equable flow, 
causing vibrations in the ocean of existence. The sleeping 
soul is wakened and its calm unfettered course is arrested. 
It wakes up, thinks, builds an individuality and isolates 
itself from the stream of being. In deep sleep these barriers 
are broken. Nirvana is getting back into the stream of 
being and resuming the uninterrupted flow. Even as no 
thought waves perturb the stream of being when a man 
sleeps, so also in nirvana do we have peaceful rest. 
Nirvana is neither annihilation nor existence as we con- 
ceive it, but is becoming one with the eternal reality, 
which Buddha does not explicitly admit. Only since it 
is beyond the horizon of human thought we are obliged 
to employ negative terms to describe it. It is a condition 
transcending subject-object relations. In it there is no 
trace of self-consciousness. It is a state of activity which 
is not subject to causality, for it is unconditioned freedom . 1 
It is a state real and enduring, though not existent in 
the world of time and space. The psalms of the elders 
and the nuns are full of eloquent descriptions of the deep 
joy and the immortal delight of nirvana surpassing all 
description. The individual consciousness enters into a 
state where all relative existence is dissolved. It is the 
silent beyond. In one sense it is self-extinction, in another 
absolute freedom. It is the fading of the star in the 
brilliant rise of the sun or the melting of the white cloud 
in the summer air. To think that nirvana is annihilation 
is according to Buddha “ a wicked heresy.” 1 

Though the nirvanic condition is represented as imply- 
ing the highest kind of activity, still it is viewed predomi- 
nantly in a negative way as passive. In an age when this 
world, full of life, bustle and excitement, gave no hope to 
men who were growing tired of existence, the perfect condi- 
tion comes to be represented as more restful than romantic, 
a state of peace and happiness, stillness and calm, rest 
and refreshment. The ceaseless flux of rebirth is felt 
with such power that nirvana, or the condition in which 
the flux is said to be stayed, is hailed as a blessed release. 

Buddha, with the Upanisad thinkers, refused to allow 

' Cf ^nnyatanimittapranihitam. * Sariiyiitta, iii. 109. 



ETHICAL IDEALISM OF BUDDHISM 451 


any speculations about the condition of men who attain 
nirvana, since it is not an object of knowledge. Yet in 
the way of the Upanisads he gives descriptions of it both 
positive and negative. In the Tevijja Sutta he even allows 
it to be called union with Brahma. Since such a descrip- 
tion does not consist with the view which makes Buddha 
a negative thinker, denying any abiding principle in man 
and the world, Rhys Davids says : “ In holding out a 

hope of union with Brahma as a result of the practice of 
universal love, the Buddha is most probably intended to 
mean a ‘ union with Brahma ’ in the Buddhist sense, that 
is to say, a temporary companionship as a separate being 
with the Buddhist Brahma, to be enjoyed by a new indi- 
vidual not consciously identical with its predecessor. It is 
just possible that the argmnentum ad hominem should be 
extended to this part of the sutta, and that the statement 
in iii. i should be taken to mean : ‘ This (universal love) is 
the only way to that kind of union with your own Brahma 
which you desire.’ But such a yielding to heretical 

opinion at the close of his own exposition of the truth 
would scarcely be imputed to a Buddha.” 1 Rhys Davids 
forgets that it is no heresy according to Buddha. If we 
look upon nirvana as a positive condition we must admit 
the reality of a permanent. Logic is a hard task-master. 
Buddha is obliged to admit a permanent principle. 
“ There is, O disciples, a something that is not born, not 
produced, not created, not compounded. Were there 
not, 0 disciples, this something not born . . . there would 
be no possible exit for what is born.” 2 It is also clear 
that the reduction of self to a number of skandhas is not 
ultimate. If the self is merely an impermanent compound 
of body and mind, qualities and functions, then when it 
disappears there is nothing wdiich is delivered. We destroy 
our desires, burn our karma and are lost for ever. Free- 
dom becomes extinction. But nirvana is timeless existence, 
and so Buddha must admit the reality of a timeless self. 
There is a being at the back of all life which is uncondi- 
tioned, above all empirical categories, something which 

* Introduction to Tevijja Sutta, S.B.E., vol. xi., p. 161. 

» Udana, viii. 3, and Itivuttaka, 43. 

15 * 


VOL. I 



452 INDIAN PHILOSOPHY 

does not give rise to any effect and is not the effect of any- 
thing else. “ Of nirvana we cannot say that it has arisen, 
or that it has not arisen, or that it can arise ; that it is 
past or future or present.” 1 Nirvana is the simultaneity 
which is the support of all succession. Concrete time 
loses itself in the eternal. The shifting nature of the world 
conceals the stable reality. Only such a view is necessary 
to complete Buddha’s account of nirvana. Buddha did 
not trouble himself about the definition of these trans- 
cendental concepts which he felt to be real, for they did 
not help life and progress. In accord with his teaching 
about Malunkyaputta’s questions that he would discuss 
only those problems that have a bearing on progress in 
peace, holiness and enlightenment, and not others, he dis- 
allowed the question of the ultimate goal. A deliberate 
dismissal or an evasive answer to such a vital problem 
cannot suppress the tendency to raise it. It is an instinct 
of the human mind that engenders the problem. And 
when Buddha failed to give an orthodox solution, different 
schools derived different conclusions from his attitude. 
Some reduce nirvana to sunyata, vacuity and nihility. 
Bishop Bigandet says : “ By an inexplicable and deplorable 
eccentricity, the system promises men as a reward for 
their moral efforts the bottomless gulf of annihilation.” 
According to Mrs. Rhys Davids, ” the nirvana of Buddhism 
is simply extinction.” Oldenberg inclines to a negative 
view. 2 Dahlke frequently suggests it. In one place he 
writes: ‘‘Only in Buddhism does the conception freedom 
from pain remain purely a negative thing and not a positive 
in disguise — heavenly bliss.” 3 According to these writers 
nirvana is the night of nothingness, the darkness where 
all light is extinguished. Such a one-sided reading of 
Buddha’s theory is not new. Buddha, after having declared 
that the condition of the liberated one is inconceivable, 
continues: “Teaching this, explaining this, I am falsely, 
without reason, wrongly, not truthfully accused by some. 
... ‘ An unbeliever is the samana Gotama, the real 
entity’s destruction, annihilation, dying away is what he 
preaches.’ What I am not, what is not my doctrine, 

* Milmda. * See Buddha, p. 273. i Buddhist Essays, p. 48. 



ETHICAL IDEALISM OF BUDDHISM 453 


that I am accused of.” 1 Strange to say there are 
others who look upon the Buddhist nil /Sna as so 
positively pleasurable that they charge Buddha with 
hedonism. Evidently, two different views were developed 
very early on the basis of Buddha’s utterances. Buddha’s 
real attitude is probably, that nirvana is a state of per- 
fection inconceivable by us, and if we are obliged to offer 
descriptions of it, it is best to bring out its inconceivability 
by negative descriptions, its richness of content by positive 
predicates, realising all the time that such descriptions are 
at best approximations only. 

XVII 

Attitude to God 

In the prevailing religion of the period of Buddha, the 
dominant feature was the spirit of barter established 
between gods and men. While the Brahman of the Upani- 
sads was high and noble, yet ever so many gods, the 
heavenly orbs as well as the material elements, plants as 
well as animals, mountains as well as rivers, were popularly 
accepted. The unbridled license of a wild imagination 
deified all possible objects of the world, and as if these 
were not enough, added to them monsters, shapes and 
symbols of fancy. The Upanisads, no doubt, shattered 
the authority of these gods in the world of thought, but 
did not disturb their sway in the world of practice. So 
men were not wanting who paraded the gods as the 
creators of the world and governors of the universe able 
to affect for good or ill the destiny of man. Buddha 
realised that the only way to remove the haunting fear of 
the gods, the threatened torments of the future and the 
corruption of the human spirit, inclined to buy the good- 
will of the gods by flattery and praise, was to destroy the 
gods once and for all. The idea of a first cause does not 
help us in moral progress. It leads to inaction and irre- 
sponsibility. If God exists, He must be the sole cause 
of all that happens, good as well as evil, and man can have 
no freedom of his own. If He abhors wickedness and dis- 
owns the authorship of evil, then He is not a universal 

» Majjhima, 22. 



454 INDIAN PHILOSOPHY 

agent. We expect to be forgiven by God. 1 If the grace 
of God is all powerful, if it can make in an instant 
a saint of a criminal, we are tempted to be indif- 
ferent to the virtuous life and cultivation of character. 
Character building is so much labour lost. Heaven and 
hell merely happen to be the reward of virtue and vice. 
If evil-doing means hell, men feel that hell is a long way 
off, while simple pleasure is next door to us. Buddha had 
to oppose the prevailing view and declare that virtue and 
happiness, vice and suffering are organically related. 2 The 
uncertain nature of philosophical speculation which indulged 
in all sorts of fancies, and the practical conviction which 
made men throw the burden on gods rather than rely on 
their own efforts, led Buddha to confine his teaching to 
this world. A strictly scientific attitude sees no god in 
the thunderbolt or angels in heaven. Religious illusion 
was dissolved by the natural interpretation of things. 
The hypothesis of a personal God seemed inconsistent with 
it. The law of karma requires us to reject all notions of 
favouritism, caprice and arbitrariness. The majesty of 
God and the prestige of Providence pale before this prin- 
ciple of karma. Not a hair can drop from the head, not a 
stone can fall to the ground without the decree of karma. 
A God who can neither adapt nor alter, neither produce 
nor modify, is no God at all. Moreover, it is not easy to 
reconcile the heart-rending facts of life with the belief in 
a loving God. The suffering of the world is intelligible only 
on the hypothesis of karma. It explains all about the 
world of living beings, inhabitants of hell, animals, ghosts, 
men and gods. There is nothing superior to karma. 
Though Buddha admits the existence of deities like Indra, 
Varuna, etc., for purposes of explanation they are un- 
necessary. Even they are involved in the round of births 
and cannot interfere with the solemn law of moral causa- 
tion.3 There is no divine author of our being. A man 
is born from his own deeds. Even what parents he has 
depends on his karma. “ My action is my possession . . . 

1 " God will forgive me, for that is His business ” (Heine). 

* See Anguttara Nikaya, 6. I. 

J See Dialogues of Buddha, i, pp. 280 S, 302. 



ETHICAL IDEALISM OF BUDDHISM 455 


my inheritance . . . the matrix which bears me . . . the 
race to which I belong . . . my refuge.” The view of 
the orthodox that there is a supreme personal creator, 
Isvara, and the view of the materialists (svabhavavada) 
that the development of the world is due to the innate 
independent power of things, are both repudiated by the 
Buddhists. The diversity of the world comes from acts. 1 
Actions bear a fruit of mastery. They create and organise 
the material things necessary to their reward. If a man 
is destined to be born a sun god, then not only is he born, 
but he gets an abode, a celestial palace, a moving chariot, 
etc., as the fruit of mastery. 2 Even so at the beginning of 
the cosmic period the whole material universe is created 
by the mastering energy of the acts to be enjoyed by the 
future inhabitants. The receptacle of the world (bhajana- 
loka) is the fruit of the mastery of the acts of all living 
beings (sattvaloka). 

The traditional arguments in support of the existence 
of God were disputed by the early Buddhists. The proof 
that as a watch implies a watchmaker, even so the world 
implies a God is offensive to them. We need not have a 
conscious cause. Even as the seed develops into the 
germ, and the germ into the branch, we can have produc- 
tion without a thinking cause or a ruling providence. 
Thoughts and things are the fruit of acts even in the same 
way as pleasant and unpleasant sensations are. Milinda 
compares the cycle of existence determined by karma to a 
wheel which recoils on itself or with the reciprocal genera- 
tion of the hen from the egg, and the egg from the hen. 
Eye, ear, body and spirit come into contact with the 
world, occasioning sensation, desire, action, etc., and the 
fruit of these is again an eye, an ear, a body, a spirit that 
will make a new being. This is the everlasting law of 
righteousness. We cannot alter its course. Buddha, more 
a teacher than a saviour, helps us to see the truth. He 
does not imagine a world-maker far back in the ages, 
beginning the series of samsara. The flow of the world has 
no other cause beside itself. To him the cosmological argu- 

i Karmajam lokavaicitryam, Abhidharmakosa, iv. I. 

• Adhipatipkala. 



456 INDIAN PHILOSOPHY 

ment had no force. Enough if we know how things happen. 
We need not go behind the order of the world. Though 
an explanation by antecedent conditions is no final truth, 
still to man nothing more is open. A first cause which is 
itself uncaused seems to be self-contradictory. The neces- 
sity of conceiving every cause as effect which has its cause 
in a preceding one makes the conception of an uncaused 
cause absolutely unthinkable. Similarly, the teleological 
argument is untenable in view of the obvious imperfection 
of the world. The world seems to be an ingenious contriv- 
ance for inflicting suffering. Nothing could be more elaborate 
and masterly in its perfection than this scheme of pain. A 
perfect Creator cannot be the author of this imperfect 
world. Neither a benevolent God nor caprice, but a law 
which works with a fatal logic, is the truth of things. Buddha 
would agree with Spinoza in the view that the world is 
neither good nor bad, neither heartless nor irrational, 
neither perfect nor beautiful. It is man’s anthropo- 
morphism that makes him look upon the cosmic process 
as a sort of human activity. Nature obeys no laws im- 
posed from without. We have only necessities in nature . 1 

1 In a conversation with Anathapiqdika Buddha is said to have argued the 
question thus : " If the world had been made by ISvara, there should be no 
change nor destruction, there should be no such thing as sorrow or calamity, as 
right or wrong, seeing that all things, pure and impure, must come from 
him. If sorrow and joy, love and hate, which spring up in all conscious 
beings, be the work of Isvara, he himself must be capable of sorrow and 
joy, love and hatred, and if he has these, how can he be said to be perfect ? 
If ISvara be the maker, and if all beings have to submit silently to their 
maker’s power, what would be the use of practising virtue ? The doing 
of right or wrong would be the same, as all deeds are his making and must 
be the same with their maker. But if sorrow and suffering are attributed 
to another cause, then there would be something of which Isvara is not 
the cause. Why, then, should not all that exists be uncaused too ? Again, 
if Isvara be the maker, he acts either with or without a purj osc. If he 
acts with a purpose, he cannot be said to be all perfect, for a purpose neces- 
sarily implies satisfaction of a want. If he acts without a purpose, he must 
be like the lunatic or suckling babe. Besides, if Isvara be the maker, why 
should not people reverently submit to him, why should they oiler supplica- 
tions to him when sorely pressed by necessity ? And why should people 
adore more gods than one ? Thus the idea uf ISvara is proved false by 
rational argument, and all such contradictory assertions should be exposed.” 
(ASvaghosa’s Buddhacarita.) " If, as theists say, God is too great for 
man to be able to comprehend Him, then it follows that His qualities also 
surpass our range of thought, and that we can neither know Him nor 



ETHICAL IDEALISM OF BUDDHISM 457 


XVIII 

The Implications of Karma 

The oppressing sense of the mechanical samsara produces 
a passionate longing for an escape from it. This pessi- 
mistic outlook is inevitable so long as the premises are 
granted. On account of its metaphysical agnosticism 
Buddhism could not emphasise the Upanisad idea of a 
divine plan of samsara arranged to help the spiritual evolu- 
tion of man. The whole conception without a spiritual 
background seems to be devoid of any point except it 
be to convince us of the purposelessness of all existence. 
But the necessity of karma and the reality of spirit 
are different ways of expressing the one truth. While 

karma does not consist with special miracles, it need 
not be interpreted as excluding a constant spiritual 
activity. It disallows only the capricious God, who 
is not found everywhere and always, but here and 
there and at rare intervals. Abstract intellect which 

attribute to Him the quality of a creator” (Rodhicaryavatara) . If the 
world has not been created by Isvara. may not all existence be a mani- 
festation of the absolute, the unconditioned, the unknowable behind 
all appearances ? ” Said the Blessed One to Anathapindika : ' If by the 

absolute is meant something out of relation to all known things, its existence 
cannot be established by any reasoning (hetu vidyasastra) . How can we 
know that anything unrelated to other things exists at all ? The whole 
universe, as we know it, is a system of relations : we know nothing that 
is, or can be, unrelated. How can that which depends on nothing and is 
related to nothing produce things which are related to one another and 
depend for their existence upon one another ? Again, the absolute is one 
or many. If it be only one, how can it be the cause of the different things 
which originate, as we know, from dilferent causes ? If there be as many 
different absolutes as there are things, how can the latter be related to one 
another ? If the absolute pervades all things and fills all space, 
then it cannot also make them, for there is nothing to make. Further, 
if the absolute is devoid of all qualities (nirguna), all things arising 
from it ought likewise to be devoid of qualities. Cut in realitv all 
things in the world are circumscribed throughout by qualities. Hence the 
absolute cannot be their cause. If the absolute be considered to be different 
from the qualities, how does it continually create the things possessing such 
qualities and manifest itself in them ? Again, if the absolute be unchangeable, 
all things should be unchangeable too, for the effect cannot differ in nature 
from the cause. But all things in the woiid undergo change and decay. IIuw 



458 


INDIAN PHILOSOPHY 


moves among ideas and concepts reduces the concrete 
reality of the world to the most general terms. There are 
in the Upanisads also such abstract representations of 
Brahman divorcing it from its concrete existence in life 
and consciousness. The Infinite is beyond the reach of 
vision and thought. Such a transcendental conception 
which we may call indifferently an infinite zero or an inex- 
pressible reality, the nameless nihil, indefinable, 1 self-less 2 
and base-less, 3 is of no use in life. Buddha calls it the 
fiction of the metaphysician. 3 This warning was needed at 
a time when people were losing their moral energy in the 
ecstatic apprehension of the absolute. At best, since the 
reality of such an infinite is incapable of verification, we 
must leave it an open question. Buddha asks us to sus- 
pend judgment where knowledge is impossible. If relativity 
is a necessary condition of thought, then it applies to the 
thought of God also. Let us therefore give up the attempt 
to define the absolute and look at pratyak, or the actual, 
and not at the parak, or the transcendent. We have defi- 
nite knowledge of the phenomenal flow. By his own insist- 

then can the absolute be unchangeable ? Moreover, if the absolute which 
pervades all is the cause of everything, why should we seek liberation ? 
For we ourselves possess this absolute and must patiently endure every suffer- 
ing and sorrow incessantly created by the absolute ” (Asvaghosa’s Buddha- 
canta). S.S.S.S. gives an account of the arguments of later Buddhism against 
the theistic systems of Nyaya-Vaisesika. (i) We cannot maintain the 
creatorship of God logically. (2) If He is the Lord of the world. He leads 
men to the practice of unrighteousness also. (3) If He is the authority 
for religious scriptures, how can His contradictory language be authoritative ? 
(4) If He is only the agent for the virtuous, then He is not infinite, not being 
all. (5) Has He in creation any end in view, any self-interest in the matter ? 
If He has, He is imperfect ; if He has not, why did He trouble about creation 
at all ? Does He undertake to do that which is profitless ? If His activity 
be mere diversion, He seems to play like a little child. (6) The existence 
of a God makes man helpless, for being unavoidably impelled by Him he 
goes to heaven or hell. (7) What is the good of suggesting that people 
are tortured for the pleasure of the Lord ? (8) If He is free to bestow 

boons, He may do so even upon the wicked and the vicious, and it is open 
to Him to send the virtuous to hell. (9) If He bestows gifts according to 
the karmas of the individuals, then all men are lords like Him. Being 
devoid of freedom in the matter of granting gifts, why is He to be called 
the Lord of all ? (iv. 23-38). It is to be noted that the three works here 
referred to belong to later Buddhism. 

■ Anirdesyam. » Anatmyam. 

* Anilayanam. 4 Brahmajala Sutta, i. 36, 



ETHICAL IDEALISM OF BUDDHISM 459 


ence on the causal connexions of phenomena, he seems to 
support the view that there is no ultimate spirit behind 
this ancient shoreless sea of forms incomprehensibly inter- 
changing, no unknown God who with His protean magic 
or maya shapes and reshapes for ever all cosmic being. 
Still, the explicit teaching of the Upanisads, which is 
nowhere denied by Buddha , 1 is necessary to give complete- 
ness to the doctrine of Buddha. According to both the 
Upanisads and Buddhism, it is the fate of man’s life to 
be restless, capricious and tragic. But this pain is not the 
whole of it. The Upanisads argue that the parade;-: of 
the world, its caprice, its tragedy, are the witnesses to the 
life of the spirit. They are there to provoke the spiritual 
power of man and give him victory. Contradiction is at 
the heart of things, because the world is spiritual. Buddha 
admits that we should conquer the passions of sin to attain 
the joy of spirit. It is misleading to think that the lowly 
passions are all and caprice is at the centre of the universe. 
Buddha allows that endurance is the essence of spirituality, 
courage the vital energy of truth. If we exaggerate one 
essential element of a divine arrangement, then we tend to 
look upon the world as godless. A whole view tells us 
that it is possible for us to catch the rhythm and pulse- 
beat of the spirit that is working even through the so-called 
caprice of nature. Without such an idea there will be no 
gleam of purpose in the world. The theory that the world 
is moving to a higher morality and a deeper wisdom will 
lose its sense. Surely Buddha does not view the world as 
purposeless un-reason. It is not a becoming without end 
or aim, mere sound and fury signifying nothing. Such a 
view would be the death of all idealism. Buddha dis- 
cerned in the succession of events the working out of a 
deep design. The world of passing events reflects the 
reality of an idea, cedi it karma or the law of righteous- 
ness. There is no law against this law. Except against 

1 There is no passage where the Buddhist texts refer to the Brahman, 
of the Upanisads, even for polemical purposes. " The Brahman as the 
universal one is not alluded to by the Buddhists either as an element of 
an alien or of their own creed, though they very frequently mention the 
God BrahmS.” (Oldenlx rg : Buddhv.) 



INDIAN PHILOSOPHY 


4G0 

the background of this absolute eternal value, the show of 
the world is a mere phantasmagoria. The discipline of 
karma is purifying and remedial. Its operation is the 
energising of a vital law. It is the business of man to so 
order his life as to bring it into harmony with this law. 
The world was, is and will be ruled by righteousness. While 
a personal creator is disputed by Buddha, this eternal 
principle is not. Buddha will not say that the principle 
of karma is an entirely mindless energy. It is not an 
unintelligent principle that frames the ions and the elec- 
trons, that gathers the atoms into molecules and the worlds. 
There is nothing to tell us that Buddha denied the reality 
of an eternal self-sustaining spirit, the active mind of the 
universe. While w'e cannot know more about God than 
that He is an absolute law, we perceive enough from this 
world of relativity to compel us to recognise an invisible 
spirit. This law is only the expression of a divine mind, 
if we can indulge in a theological phrase. 

The law contradicts theism, only if theism implies 
arbitrary interference and supersession of law and order 
Such action of God is unnatural. Only children and 
savages could believe in an interfering God. To refute 
meaningless interference is not to deny the reality of a 
supreme spirit. For the conception of order, natural and 
moral, does not supersede the final agency of spirit. 
Simply because we cannot comprehend the spiritual source 
and sustaining centre, we need not deny its existence. The 
absoluteness of the moral law which Buddha assumes 
requires a central spirit about which he is silent. Our belief 
that events will continue to happen in accordance with 
the forecasts of reason, and things in the future will not be 
uninterpretable chaos, is grounded in a spiritual view of the 
universe. Even on the most unsympathetic view we have to 
say that Buddha abolished religion of the popular type which 
rests largely on craven fear or worship of power, and 
strengthened religion in the sense of trust in righteousness. 
He held the universe to be a spiritual one, not a mere mechan- 
ism but a dharmakaya, pulsating with life. Dharma is the 
warp and the v;oof of all that lives and moves. Every 
natural cause is the revelation of the spirit at work. Scepti- 



ETHICAL IDEALISM OF BUDDHISM 461 


cism about the spiritual basis of the world is inconsistent with 
disinterested conduct. And Buddha need not be charged with 
such a paradoxical position. 


XIX 

Practical Religion 

The religious instinct of man requires a god, and so in 
the practical religion of Buddha he himself was deified, it 
spite of his own caution. For when Sariputta said to him 
“ Such faith have I, Lord, that methinks there never was 
and never will be either monk or Brahma who is greater 
and wiser than Thou,” he replied : “ Grand and bold are 
the words of thy mouth ; behold thou hast burst forth 
into ecstatic song. Come, hast thou, then, known all the 
Buddhas that were ? ” ” No, Lord.” “ Hast thou 

known all the Buddhas that will be ? ” “ No, Lord.” 

“ But at least thou knowest me, my conduct, my mind, 
my wisdom, my life, my salvation.” “ No, Lord.” ” Thou 
seest that thou knowest not the venerable Buddhas of the 
past and the future ; wiry then are thy words so grand and 
bold ? ” 1 Yet the nature of man is irrepressible. Buddha, 
the eye of the world (lokacaksus), the model we have to 
imitate, he who reveals to us the path to perfection, w r ho 
considers himself to be nothing more than a knov r er who has 
discovered the path and made it possible for others to walk 
in his footsteps, becomes the sole refuge and the only god 
of the masses. 2 

Buddha adopts popular theology which consoles us by 
building up other w'orlds when he admits the reality of 
Brahma and other gods. 3 Only he makes all his gods 
mortal. He denies the first cause of the universe, a creator 
or controller of karma, but acquiesces in popular beliefs 

* Mahaparinibbana Sutta. 

a Cf. : "So also, O Brahmin, of those beings who live in ignorance and 
are shut up and confined as it were in an egg, I have first broken the egg- 
shell of ignorance, and alone in the universe obtained the most exalted 
universal Buddhahood. Thus am I, O Brahmin, the oldest and the noblest 
of beings.” (Oldenberg : Buddha, p. 325.) Buddha is only amargadorsaka, 

1 See Mahagovinda Sutta and Tevijja Sutta. 



462 


INDIAN PHILOSOPHY 


and speaks of intercourse between men and gods. He 
admits spiritual exercises which help us in securing life in 
the lower worlds of form and no form. To secure greater 
prestige for Buddhism, it is even suggested that the gods 
Brahma and Sakka (Indra) are converts to Buddhism. 
They are as much in need of saving knowledge as men. 
All this is in accordance with the Brahmanical tradition, 
where the gods are said to reach the divine status by pious 
deeds, sacrifices and penances. When their reserve of 
punya or merit is exhausted, by their experience of divine 
pleasures, they pass out into other forms. There are 
stories in which the gods struggle for life and power, 
prestige and pre-eminence. When new aspirants for divine 
rank heap up penances and merit which entitle them to 
divinity, the old gods put obstacles in the way. 1 * 3 Buddhism 
adapts the old gods to its new doctrine by making them 
all subordinate to the Buddhist monk aiming at nirvana. 
“ Brahma is overpowered by avidya, Visnu is embraced 
by great illusion which it is difficult to discriminate. 
Sarhkara holds Parvati in his own person, owing to exces- 
sive attachment, but in this world the great muni, the 
Lord, is without avidya, without illusion, and without 
attachment." J 


XX 

Theory of Knowledge 

Taking up next the Buddhist theory of knowledge, we 
find that, unlike the materialist, the Buddhist admits the 
validity of inference in addition to perception, 3 though there 
is a difference between the Buddhist theory of inference 
and the Naiyayika’s. The Buddhist maintains that con- 
nexions could be established between causes and effects, 
while the Naiyayika admits other forms of invariable 


1 The puranic stories of the type of Menaka and Visvamitra illustrate 
this fact. 

» Bhaktiiataka by Ramacandra, 3. 

3 See S.S.S.S., ill. 4. 4. 78-22. Early Buddhism, however, seems to 
have accepted analogy and authority also, ilaitrcya discarded analogy 
and Dignaga discarded authority. Sec J A S. of Bengal, 1903, p. 179. 



ETHICAL IDEALISM OF BUDDHISM 463 


concomitance as well. According to the former, we can 
argue from effects to causes']; according to the latter, not 
only from effects to causes, but also from signs to things 
signified. This distinction is due to the Buddhist doctrine 
of becoming. Though inductive generalisations based on 
inseparability may not be always valid, they are valid with 
regard to causal successions. That all horned animals 
have divided hoofs is an empirical generalisation observed 
to be valid within the limits of experience, though it may 
not be absolutely valid. ( So far as inference to fire from 
smoke is concerned, it cannot be denied, for denying it, it 
is impossible to live.', 

(flow can we esfablish causal relations between two 
phenomena ? The early Buddhist says that if A precedes 
B, and the disappearance of A means the disappearance 
of B, other things remaining the same, then A is the cause 
of B. This is the method of difference. Later Buddhists 
develop this doctrine by emphasising the immediate antece- 
dents of the cause. They also insist that we must be careful 
that no other circumstances are altered. So they state the 
full doctrine of causal inference in five steps, whence it is 
called pancakarani : (x) In the first stage we perceive 

neither the cause nor the effect. (2) The cause appears. 
(3) The effect appears. (4) The cause disappears. (5) And 
the effect disappears. Of course, relations of co-existence 
such as those of genus and species can also be established, 
though in a different manner. If we notice a number of 
instances of the association of a certain character with 
certain others, and if we have never perceived the one 
without the other, we suspect some fundamental identity 
between the two. And if the suspicion is con- 
firmed and identity established, then the generalisation 
follows. If we know an object to be a triangle, we may 
call it a figure, for the generic features must be present in 
the specific. It cannot be a triangle were it not also a 
figure. So among successions the causal ones, and among 
co-existences the genus-species ones, warrant generalisa- 
tions, according to the Buddhists. 

We are not sure that Buddha adhered to these canons of 
truth. The pessimistic view of life, the brlmf in samsara, 



464 INDIAN PHILOSOPHY 

heaven and hell are all taken bodily from the thought 
systems which prevailed in his day. It only shows that 
the most radical account of reality cannot dispense with 
the past history of mind. If we leave aside this part of 
Buddha’s doctrine accepted by him without analysis and 
criticism from previous thought, we feel regarding the rest 
of his philosophy that he was more or less consistent. He 
declines to apply his thought to first causes as well as to 
final causes. He is concerned with actual existence and 
not ultimate reality. To a Brahmin lost in philosophical 
truths about the eternity and the non-eternity of the 
world, Buddha says that he has nothing to do with theories. 
His system is not a dariana, or a philosophy, but a yana, 
or a vehicle, a practical method leading to liberation . 1 
Buddha analyses experience, discerns its true nature. 
Since they adopt the method of analysis, the Buddhists 
are sometimes called analytic thinkers or vibhajyavadins. 
Buddha confines his attention to the world and leaves the 
gods at rest, expecting in return that they will leave him 
at rest. He adopts an attitude of pragmatic agnosticism 
about transcendental iealities. This alone is consistent 
with the facts of experience, the deductions of reason and 
the laws of morality. Nothing is denied, but the back- 
ground is left open for any future reconstruction. We 
must carefully note that this does not mean that Buddha 
is a sceptic who seeks rest in negation. All that he says 
is, let us make ourselves perfect first without quarrelling 
about the goal of perfection. So indifferent was he to 
metaphysical doctrines that among the early followers of 
Buddha we find some who hold to the Brahmanical views. 
The Brahmajala sutta tells us of disciples who speak openly 
against Buddha’s views. Buddha’s sermons are addressed 
to his Brahmin and Buddhist followers together. So 
long as we are of the earth earthly, Buddha asks us to 
give up the attempts to define the indefinable and indulge 
in those "love-affairs of the understanding," the discussions 
of metaph} r sical problems. He would not say anything 
to compel belief or work miracles to persuade the unbe- 
lieving. Inward impulse will lead to the truth, and so his 

* Majjhima Nikaya. 



ETHICAL IDEALISM OF BUDDHISM 4G5 


disciples were exhorted to practise love and charity. Not 
philosophy, but peace alone purifies the soul. When we 
have the deeper illumination born of moral life, we shall 
have the true enlightenment, and why should we try tc 
forestall it with our weak understanding ? 

The striking fact is that Buddha passes over in silence 
all questions of metaphysical import on the ground that 
they are ethically unimportant. What exactly is the 
significance of Buddha’s silence ? Did he know the truth 
and yet refuse to divulge it ? Was he a negative dog- 
matist, denying soul and God ? Or did he consider such 
discussions unprofitable ? Was it his idea that the specu- 
lative tendency was a weakness which ought not to be 
encouraged ? Many of the students of early Buddhism 
consider that B.iddha abolished God and cast off the soul, 
and that it is more definitely atheistic than we have here 
represented it to be. That such a negative interpretation 
is supported by Nagasena, Buddhaghesa as well as the 
Hindu thinkers who criticise the system is well known. 
Nor do we deny that Buddhism became identified very early 
in its career with a negative metaphysic. We submit, how- 
ever, that this negative view is not actually expounded 
by Buddha himself, but is an interpretation of his silence 
on ultimate problems, thought out by his early followers. 
This silence may be indicative of either ignorance of the 
ultimate truth or a deep desire to point a way of salvation 
open to all, whether they are possessed of a metaphysical 
bent or not. The silence of Buddha may be interpreted 
therefore as the expression of an attitude of atheism, or of 
agnosticism, or of a moral earnestness and deep love for 
humanity. In our account of Buddhism, we have frequently 
urged that Buddha’s specific declarations against the denial 
of self, against the confounding of nirvana with annihilation 
and in favour of the reality of an unconditioned to which we 
can escape from the conditional, cannot be easily reconciled 
with a negative philosophy. The fact that Buddha felt 
that he was in the possession of truth and could lead men 
on to it militates against the second view of agnosticism. 
If he did not know the truth, he would not have considered 
himself to be a Buddha or the enlightened. The third 



466 


INDIAN PHILOSOPHY 


hypothesis remains that Buddha knew all about the ultimate 
problems, but did not announce them to the multitudes 
who came to hear him for fear that he might disturb their 
minds. 1 This view seems to us to be the most satisfactory. 
On one occasion Buddha took some dry leaves into the hollow 
of his hand and asked his disciple Ananda to tell him whether 
there were any other leaves besides those in his hand, to 
which Ananda replied : “ The leaves of autumn are falling 
on all sides, and there are more of them than can be num- 
bered.” Then the Buddha said : “ In like manner I have 
given you a handful of truths, but besides these there are 
many thousands of other truths more than can be num- 
bered.” * There are other truths, according to Buddha, 
than those of the phenomenal world which he has revealed. 
If a man is moral, he will see for himself those other truths. 
It is Buddha’s self-imposed mission to insist on the moral 
preparation necessary for the enlightenment of the kind he 
has himself attained. This attitude of Buddha has philoso- 
phical justification. He recognised the limits of human know- 
ledge and drew a boundary line separating the logically know- 
able from the unknowable. He felt that our senses apprehend 
becoming, and things which become are not real. Yet, 
with the Upanisads, he recognises the mystery of the 
infinite. When the finite intelligence takes upon itself the 
infinite task of encasing eternity in time, and immensity 
in space, it is paralysed by paradoxes. We cannot imagine 
the unimaginable. Every attempt to think being, to com- 
prehend reality, turns it into a phenomenon. Reality 
must escape the grasp of the human mind, for man himself is a 
product of avidya. Knowledge with its distinction between 
I and Thou is not final. There is an impenetrable veil 
separating man and the truth. Yet this truth or wisdom, 
which we cannot perceive or know, is not unreal. 

Where does wisdom dwell, Nagasena ? ’ ‘ Nowhere, 0 

king.’ ‘ Then, sir, there is no such thing as wisdom.’ 

' Where does the wind dwell, O king ? ’ ‘Not anywhere, 
sir.’ ‘ So there is no such thing as wind ? ’ ” Buddha 
contends that the reality of the absolute is logically inde- 

1 See B.G., iii. 26. 

* Quoted in Anandacarya’s Brahmadar^anam. p to. 



ETHICAL IDEALISM OF BUDDHISM 467 


monstrable, but never does he assert that it has no existence. 
His opinion may be put in the words of Goethe’s Faust : — 

Who dares to name Him, 

Who to say of Him, I believe ? 

Who is there ever with a heart to dare 
To utter " I believe Him not ” ? 

Buddha does not like the idea of basing the reality of 
Brahman on Vedic authority, for when once we admit the 
evidence of revelation, there is no end to it. So in the 
Tevijja Sutta, Buddha compares those who believe in 
Brahman on the authority of the Vedas and seek union 
with him, to those who build a staircase at the junction 
of four roads to mount up to a high mansion as to which 
they can neither see nor know either where it is, or how it 
is, or what it is built of, or whether it exists at all. It is 
also true that Buddha does not encourage attempts to 
fathom the depths of the unknown . 1 It is a waste of 
valuable time to be discussing things for which our intel- 
lects are inadequate. From the past history of metaphy- 
sical disputes, moreover, Buddha learns that the solid earth 
and moral law begin to rock under our feet when we attempt 
to fly in the attenuated atmosphere of speculation. So he 
asks us to turn back to mother earth and not be taken in 
by the idle flapping of our wings in the vacuum of the 
absolute. Deep interest in metaphysical problems betrays 
to him on the part of the questioners a speculative spirit. 
So it is put down as one of the five heresies . 1 It is the 
ethical obsession of Buddha that is responsible for his 
indefiniteness on metaphysical problems. Unwilling to add 
to the confusion of the times, Buddha asks us to confine 
ourselves to the limits of the comprehensible. 

There seems to be some similarity between Kant and 
Buddha in their attitude to metaphysical problems. Both 
lived in an age when the field of philosophy was divided 
into the opposite camps of metaphysical dogmatism and 
scepticism. Both felt the need for looking deeper into the 

1 Francis Bacon, in the spirit of Buddha, observes that final causes, like 
the vestal virgins dedicated to God, are barren. 

* Cullavagga, ix. i. 4. 



4G8 


INDIAN PHILOSOPHY 


foundations of the dogmatic procedure of reason and were 
anxious to safeguard the validity of ethical principles. 
Both ask us to give up attempts to comprehend logically 
super-sensible realities. To both metaphysics is incapable 
of solving the problems which reason suggests about the 
hidden nature of things. The moment we try to grasp 
them intellectually we shall be lost in antinomies and con- 
tradictions. Both look upon the moral law as the supreme 
guide of life, a law above gods and men, from everlasting 
to everlasting. Doubt (or vieikitsa) of the moral law is 
a grievous sin fatal to salvation. 

As to the tendency to steer clear of ultimate prob- 
lems, we cannot help saying that it was unfortunate. Man 
cannot but philosophise. When Buddha says that what 
is given is conditioned, the question naturally arises, is 
there an unconditioned ? Is that unconditioned only the 
whole of the conditions or an absolute first ? The problems 
whether the world has a beginning, whether the soul is 
immortal, whether man is a free agent, whether there is a 
supreme cause of the world, have a vital relation to the 
highest aspirations of humanity and refuse to be set aside. 
Though it is not open to us to solve them, it is not possible 
for us to desist from raising them. The dignity of man is 
not compromised if he is not able to know the truth of 
things, but yet the same dignity demands that he should 
not be indifferent to it. Buddha tells us that we should 
beware of the temptation of casting a glance into the 
depths, since it is not given to us to fathom the abyss. But 
his dogmatic denunciation of the futility of extra-empirical 
inquiries did not gain its end. 1 The history of Buddhism 


i “ So long as it is thought possible to reach that distant goal of know- 
ledge, so long it is vain for a wise simplicity to protest that we can do very 
well without it. The pleasure of advancing knowledge makes it readily take 
the appearance of a duty, and a deliberate self-restraint of reason seems 
to show, not the simplicity of wisdom, but a stupidity which hinders the 
elevation of our nature. For questions as to the nature of spirit, as to 
freedom and predestination, as to the future state, etc., at once set in motion 
all the powers of the intelligence, and draw men by their importance intc 
a fever of speculation which subtilises and decides, dogmatises and con- 
troverts, with every new semblance of insight It is only when such dis- 
cussions give place to a philosophy which tests its own procedure and takes 
account not only of objects, but also of their relation to the mind of man, 



ETHICAL IDEALISM OF BUDDHISM 469 


points to the inevitability of metaphysics. It is a living 
proof of the truth that we fight against metaphysics only 
to fall into it. 

There is not always a virtue in vagueness, for the inde- 
finiteness of Buddha’s metaphysics enabled his disciples to 
fasten different systems on to what he said. His cautious 
and careful attitude developed into negative systems, and 
his teaching fell a prey to the very dogmatism which he 
was anxious to avoid. In Nagasena, as we have seen, the 
supreme reality becomes a baseless assumption. He repu- 
diates the distinction between the knowable or the pheno- 
menal and the noumenal that is not knowable. Knowledge 
of things is no longer considered to be relative. It is true and 
absolute. There is nothing beyond experience. The real 
and the experienced are identical. The relative is the 
absolute. A true metaphysic must be a theory of experi- 
ence, and not a guesswork as to what is at the back of it 
hiding itself under a veil. We have to accept the fact 
that the world has neither limits in space nor commence- 
ment in time. We must not employ the hypothesis of a 
cause distinct from the world to account for it. Other 
followers of Buddha tried to round off Buddha’s deliver- 
ances on the nature of this world by their own schemes 
of metaphysics. 

XXI 

Buddhism and the Upanisads 

The inquirer who desires to reconstruct remote forms 
of thought has not here the sure key which consecutive 
progress or logical evolution can give him. Buddha, in 
his deep hatred of darkness and love of light, wished to 
abandon all mystery. This procedure favoured clear and 
definite thought, but had its own defects. The teaching of 

that the limits can be drawn closer and the boundary stones laid, which 
will henceforth prevent speculation from passing beyond its proper sphere. 
It needs some philosophy to discover the difficulties that surround many 
conceptions, which are treated by the ordinary consciousness as easy and 
simple. A little more philosophy drives away the illusion of knowledge 
which still remains and persuades us that such objects lie entirely beyond 
the horizon of man’s intelligence.” (Caird : Philosophy of Kant, vol.i.,p. 142.) 



470 INDIAN PHILOSOPHY 

Buddha became deficient in depth and lacking in organic 
character. His ideas stood out in hard outlines broken off 
from each other. The organic inter-connections were not 
clear. The atmosphere which alone could weld together 
the different elements into a spiritual whole was implicitly 
present. Human reason, which is architectonic in its nature, 
must regard its ideas and principles as parts of a possible 
system, and this instinct of the mind requires us to show 
how the teaching of Buddha has a unity of principle under- 
lying it. The only metaphysics that can justify Buddha’s 
ethical discipline is the metaphysics underlying the Upani- 
sads. Buddhism is only a later phase of the general 
movement of thought of which the Upanisads were the 
earlier. “ Many of the doctrines of the Upanisads are no 
doubt pure Buddhism, or rather Buddhism is on many 
points the consistent carrying out of the principle laid 
down in the Upanisads.” 1 Buddha did not look upon 
himself as an innovator, but only a restorer of the ancient 
way, i.e. the way of the Upanisads. Both Buddhism 
and the Upanisads repudiate the authority of the Vedas 
so far as their philosophy is concerned. In practice both 
entered into an alliance with beliefs alien to their spirit, 
so that many who accepted theoretically their teaching 
were practically worshipping other gods. In this matter 
Buddhism was less compromising than the Upanisads. 
Both of them protest against the mechanical theory of 
sacrifices and ritualistic extravagances. Both emphasise that 
there is no release from rebirth either by the performance 
of sacrifice or practice of penance. It is the perception of 
the truth, the knowledge of reality, which is the basis of 
all existence, that will liberate us. The tendency to deny 
the substantial reality of the individual is common to both. 
The feeling that this life is suffering, and the life hereafter 
is that for which we sigh, is accepted by both. They 
exhort us to get rid of life’s fitful fever. The vital teach- 
ing of the Upanisads, the oneness of all life, is accepted 
by Buddha. To both life is one great pilgrimage in which 
we either drop downwards or climb upwards. The tendency 
towards universalism of Buddhist ethics is nothing new. 

* Max Muller : S.B.E., xv. ; Introduction, p. xxxvii. 



ETHICAL IDEALISM OF BUDDHISM 471 


That the absolute reality is incomprehensible by intellect 
is admitted by both. The descriptions of the absolute as 
neither void nor not void nor both nor neither remind us 
of many passages of the Upanisads. If there is nothing 
real, and if it is ordained that we should be eternally ignorant, 
we will not have the insatiable curiosity that devours us. 
In the explanations of soul, world and other problems we come 
across the Upanisad phrases of namarupa, karmavipaka, 
avidya, upadana, arhat, Sramana, Buddha, nirvana, prakrti, 
Atman, nivrti, etc. Buddhism helped to democratise the 
philosophy of the Upanisads, which was till then confined 
to a select few. This process demanded that the deep 
philosophical truths which cannot be made clear to the 
masses of men should for practical purposes be ignored. 
It was Buddha’s mission to accept the idealism of the 
Upanisads at its best, and make it available for the daily 
needs of mankind . 1 Historical Buddhism means the spread 
of the Upanisad doctrines among the peoples. It thus 
helped to create a heritage which is living to the present 
day. Such democratic upheavals are common features of 
Hindu history. When the treasures of the great sages 
were the private property of a few, Ramanuja, the great 
Vaisnava teacher, proclaimed the mystic texts to even 
the pariahs. Buddhism, we might say, is a return of 
Brahmanism to its own fundamental principles. Buddha 
is not so much a revolutionist who rode to success on the 
crest of the wave of reaction against the Upanisad theory 
as a reformer whose aim was to remould the prevalent 
theory of the Upanisads by bringing into prominence its 
neglected truths. The central defect of Buddha’s teaching 
is that in his ethical earnestness he took up and magnified 
one-half of the truth and made it look as if it were the 
whole. » His distaste for metaphysics prevented him from 
seeing that the partial truth had a necessary complement 
and rested on principles which carried it beyond its self- 
imposed limits. 


! See Holmes : The Creed of Buddha. 



472 


INDIAN PHILOSOPHY 


XXII 

Buddhism and the Samkhya System 

There are some thinkers who are of opinion that 
Buddhism and Jainism are both based on the Samkhya 
theory. Burnouf thinks that Buddhism is only a carrying 
out of the principles of the Samkhya. According to Weber 
it is not impossible that the Kapila of the Samkhya system 
and Gautama Buddha were one and the same person, and 
in support of this guess he mentions the fact of Buddha’s 
birth in Kapilavastu. It is a common assumption of these 
systems that life is suffering. They both accept the lower 
and the ephemeral gods of Brahmanism, while they are 
silent about the existence of the supreme eternal deity. 
Wilson writes that certain propositions about the eternity 
of matter, the principles of things and final extinction are 
common to Samkhya and Buddhism. According to Jacobi 
and Garbe the Samkhya propositions of duality and the 
enumeration of tattvas are older than Buddhism. It is 
true that the Samkhya theory of creation and the Buddhist 
doctrine have some similarities. 1 The “ four noble truths ” 
of Buddhism correspond to the four truths of Samkhya as 
put in the Samkhyapravacanabhasya : “ (i) That from 
which we deliver ourselves is pain. (2) Deliverance is the 
cessation of pain. (3) The cause of pain is want of dis- 
crimination between prakrti and purusa, which produces 
the continued union. (4) The means of deliverance is dis- 
cerning knowledge.” Kapila rejects sacrifices, prayers and 
ceremonies as much as Buddha. 

The Buddhists admit that Kapila, the sage to whom 
the Samkhya books ascribed the origin of their philosophy, 
lived several generations before Buddha, and that Samkhya 
ideas prevailed at the time of Buddha. In the first suttanta 
of DIghanikaya, where sixty-two different theories of existence 


1 Avidya is parallel to pradhana, samskara to buddhi, vijnana to 
ahatiikara, namarupa to tanmatras, sadayatana to indriyas (see Kern : 
Manual Ot Buddhism, p. 47, footnote 6). The pratyayasahc;ha of the Sfuiikhyas 
and the pratltyasamutpada of the Duddhists closely resemble each other 



ETHICAL IDEALISM OF BUDDHISM 473 


are mentioned, a view similar to the Samkhya is also found. 
“ On what grounds and for what reasons do the recluses and 
the Brahmins, who are believers in the eternity of existence, 
declare that both the soul and the world are eternal,” and 
that " the souls are many also ? ” Buddha must have 
known the beginnings of the system, though not the 
system itself. That the world was evil and salvation was 
isolation from prakrti may have been very suggestive to 
Buddha. The Samkhya conception of psychic process may 
even have been at the bottom of the Buddhist theory of 
skandhas. But there is no question that the Samkhya 
system is a much later growth summing up the work of 
centuries. The Samkhya Sutras (i. 27-47) refute the 
Buddhist tenet of the momentary duration of external 
objects, which succeed each other in a perpetual flux, 
and the doctrine that things exist only in perception, and 
have no objective reality, and there is nothing but £unya. 
The sutras, moreover, presuppose a knowledge of the schools 
of Buddhism and are later than the schools themselves. 


XXIII 

Success of Buddhism 

In a country where Brahmanism had been for more than 
a thousand years the prevalent religion, Buddhism succeeded 
in undermining it, and in about two hundred years came to 
be recognised as the state religion of India. Not even 
such propagandist religions as Islam and Christianity had 
any whei e, in the history of the world, such marvellous 
success. Nor can it be said that Buddha pandered to the 
passions and prejudices of people. He did not ofter any 
cheap relief from the sins of the soul or put up salvation 
to auction. There is no appeal to human selfishness, since 
Buddhism demands a rigorous renunciation of all the 
pleasures men care for. The causes of the success of 
Buddhism as a religion are the three jewels, or triratna, of 
(1) Buddha; (2) the dharma, or the law; and (3) the sangha, 
or the brotherhood. The singular personality and career 



474 INDIAN PHILOSOPHY 

of Buddha, the friend of humanity, the contemner of the 
exalted, the ascetic hero, had a tremendous effect on the 
minds of men. Speaking of the person of the founder, 
Barth writes : “ We must set clearly before us the admirable 
figure . . . that finished model of calm and sweet majesty, 
of infinite tenderness for all that breathes and compassion 
for all that suffers, of perfect moral freedom and exemption 
from every prejudice.” 1 “ He never spake but good and 

wise words. He was the light of the world.” 1 It would 
have been a surprise if his magnanimity and moral eleva- 
tion did not appeal to the imagination of the people. The 
idea of human brotherhood undermined the growing rigours 
of caste. The institution of the sangha and its spirit of 
discipline attracted many. The Buddhist monks, like their 
founder, forsook all to preach the Truth. The elevated 
morality taught by Buddha, that only the pure in heart 
shall attain salvation, sums up the Law and the Prophets. 
Buddha justified the practice of the good even to those 
who did not believe in a personal God. No other inde- 
pendent ethics gives us a more thrilling message of universal 

1 The Religions of India, p. 118. 

1 Even in the Middle Ages Marco Polo heard of Buddha and wrote of 
him : “ Had he been a Christian, he would have been a great saint of our 
Lord Jesus Christ, so holy and pure was the life he led.” “ There is un- 
questionably much in common between the character and teaching of the 
founders of the two religions. Both are represented as infinitely critical 
and infinitely wise. Both desired beyond all things the salvation of man- 
kind Both proclaimed a royal law of love, the love of our neighbour and 
ourselves, the Buddha, indeed, including among the objects of our chanty 
those poor relations of ours which we call the brute creation. Thou shalt 
hurt no living being.’ Both required of their disciples the forsaking of all 
and the following of the master. Both taught the utter vanity of earthly 
good, insisted on self-denial and exhibited compassion as the highest law 
of life. Both inculcated the supreme necessity of purity of thought and 
intention. Both prescribed the non-resistance of evil, the overcoming of 
evil with good. Both had a special tenderness for the young, the poor, 
the suffering, the outcast. In the accounts which have come down to us 
of the lives of both, there are the most remarkable parallelisms ; and what 
is more important and significant, the personality of both must be accounted 
even now the strongest religious forces in the world, drawing the hearts of 
men by a spiritual magnetism through so many ages.” (W S. Lilly : Many 
Mansions, p. 62 ) “ Among heathen precursors of the Truth I feel more 

and more that Sakyamuni is the nearest in character and eflect to Him 
Who is the Way the Truth and the Life." ( Memoirs of Bishop Milman, 
p. 203 ) 



ETHICAL IDEALISM OF BUDDHISM 475 


benevolence. At a time when bloody sacrifices were not 
yet out of fashion, the teaching of mercy to all creation 
had a tremendous effect. His opposition to ceremonialism 
contributed largely to recommend his doctrine to the masses. 
The sublime grandeur of Buddha’s teaching may be gathered 
from the following utterances of his : “ Never in this 

world does hatred cease by hatred — hatred ceases by love.” 
“ Victory breeds hatred, for the conquered is unhappy.” 
” One may conquer a thousand men in battle, but he who 
conquers himself is the greatest victor.” “ Let a man 
overcome anger by kindness, evil by good.” “ Not by 
birth, but by his conduct alone, does a man become a low 
caste or a Brahmin.” “ Hide your good deeds and confess 
before the world the sins you have committed.” “ Who 
would willingly use hard speech to those who have done a 
sinful deed, strewing salt, as it were, upon the wound of 
their fault ? ” No voice like Buddha’s ever thundered into 
our ears the majesty of the good. It is the flaming ideal 
of righteousness that helped Buddhism to succeed as a 
religion. The missionary spirit contributed considerably to 
the spread of the gospel. Buddha bade his disciples : 
“ Go into all lands and preach this gospel. Tell them that 
the poor and the lowly, the rich and the high, are all 
one, and that all castes unite in this religion as do the 
rivers in the sea.” Buddhism succeeded so well because 
it was a religion of love, giving voice to all the inarticulate 
forces which were working against the established order 
and the ceremonial religion, addressing itself to the poor, 
the lowly and the disinherited. 

REFERENCES 

Buddhist Suttas, S.B.E., vol. xi. 

The Dhammapada and Sutta Nipata, S.B.E., vol. x. 

The Questions of King Milinda, S.B.E., vols. xxxv and xxxvi. 

Warren : Buddhism in Translations. 

Rhys Davids : Buddhism. 

Rhys Davids : Buddhist India. 

Rhys Davids : The Dialogues of Buddha. 

Mrs. Rhys Davids : Buddhism. 

Mrs. Rhys Davids : Buddhist Psychology. 

16 


VOL. X 



476 INDIAN PHILOSOPHY 

Mrs. Rhys Davids and Aung : Anuruddha’s Compendium of 
Philosophy. 

Mrs. Rhys Davids and Maung Tin : The Expositor. 

Poussin : The Way to Nirvana. 

Kern : Manual of Indian Buddhism. 

Hopkins : The Religions of India, chap. xiii. 

Holmes : The Creed of Buddha. 

Coomaraswamy : Buddha and the Gospel 01 Buddhism, 



CHAPTER VIII 


EPIC PHILOSOPHY 


The readjustment of Brahmanism — The epics — The Mahabharata — 
Date — Its importance — The Ramayana — The religious ferment — The 
common philosophical ideas — Durga worship — Pasupata system — 
Vasudeva - Krspa cult — Vaisnavism — Paiicaratra religion — The 
suspected influence of Christianity — The cosmology of the Maha- 
bharata — The Sariikliya ideas in the Mahabharata — Gunas — 
Psychology — Ethics — Bhakti — Karma — Future life — Later Upanisads 
— The isvetasvatara Upanisad — The Code of Mauu— Date — Cosmology 
and ethics. 


I 

The Readjustment of Brahmanism 

While systems of revolt were agitating the eastern part of 
the country, in the west, the home of the Brahmins, great 
changes were taking place, though unconsciously. When 
new communities professing strange beliefs were being freshly 
taken into the Aryan fold, the old Vedic culture had to 
undergo a transformation agreeable to the new hordes who 
were actually swamping the country, or fail to aryanise 
them. It had either to expand and remodel its own religion, 
to accommodate new beliefs, or die and disappear. The pride 
of the Aryan would not allow him to throw open the right 
of sacrifices to the new-comers ; but they could not be left 
uncared for. Since the assimilation of the new beliefs 
was the one condition of continued existence, Aryan culture 
undertook, not without trouble and repugnance, the gigantic 
task of taking in the new beliefs and adapting itself to the 
moral needs of the new-comers The aryanisation was 
essentially a spiritual process. The Brahmin tried to 
allegorise the myth and symbol, the fable and legend, in 
which the new tribes delighted. He accepted the worship 
of the tribal gods, and attempted to reconcile them 
all with Vedic culture. Some of the later Upani- 

4VT 



478 INDIAN PHILOSOPHY 

sads describe the attempts to build a Vedic religion 
on non-Aryan sj'mbolism. The Pasupata, the BhSgavata 
and the Tantrik developments, belong to this period of social 
upheaval through which the aryanisation of vast multitudes 
in pre-Buddhistic India proceeded. They were so moulded 
and developed under Aryan influence that it is to-day 
difficult to maintain that they had not their origin in the 
early Upanisads and the Vedas. The epics of the Ramayana 
and the Mahabharata speak to us of this growth of the Vedic 
religion during the period of the Aryan expansion in India. 

II 

The Mahabharata 

The Mahabharata describes the great war waged in ancient 
times between the two branches of the one royal family, 
that of the Bharatas. It is mentioned in the fsatapatha 
Brahmana 1 that “the greatness of the Bharatas neither the 
men before nor the men after them have ever attained to.” 
The epic relates the heroic deeds of valour which were 
performed in the great w r ar fought about the thirteenth 
or the twelfth century b.c. according to R. C. Dutt and 
Pratt. 2 Colebrooke puts it in the fourteenth century b.c., 
and Wilson, Elphinstone and Wilford are of the same view. 
Macdonell writes: "There can be little doubt that the original 
kernel of the epic has, as a historical background, an ancient 
conflict between the two neighbouring tribes of the Kurus 
and the Pancalas, who finally coalesced into a single 
people. In the Yajur Veda these two tribes already appear 
united, and in the Kathaka king Dhrtarastra Vaicitravirya, 
one of the chief figures of the Mahabharata, is mentioned 
as a well-known person. Hence the historical germ of the 
great epic is to be traced to a very early period, which cannot 
well be later than the tenth century b.c. ”3 The original 
event seems to be a- non-Aryan one, if we may judge from the 
bloodthirst of Bhima, the polyandry of Draupadi and such 
other incidents. But it was soon converted into an Aryan 

> xiii. 5. 4. ’ Dutt: Ancient Hindu Civilisation- 

1 Sanskrit Literature, pp. *84-285. 



EPIC PHILOSOPHY 


479 


story. It has become a national epic, with tales from different 
parts of the country worked into a single whole. It appeals 
to all whether in Bengal or South India, in the Punjab 
or the Dcccan. It was the aim of the Mahabharata to satisfy 
the popular mind, and it could do so only by accepting 
the popular stories. It conserves in a collected form all 
the ancient beliefs and traditions of the race. It is so 
comprehensive in its scope that there is a popular saying 
that what is not in the Mahabharata is not to be found in 
the land of the Bharatas. By bringing together the social 
and the religious ideas of the different peoples assembled 
on the soil of India, it tried to impress on the minds of 
men the fundamental unity of the Bharatavarsa. Sister 
Nivedita writes : “The foreign reader, taking it up as sympa- 
thetic reader only and not as scholar, is at once struck by 
two features : in the first place, its unity in complexity ; 
and in the second, its constant effort to impress on its hearers 
the idea of a single centralised India, with an heroic tradition 
of her own as formative and uniting impulse.” 

Ill 

Date and Authorship 

It is now agreed that the present Mahabharata is an 
enlarged edition of an earlier tradition called the Bharata. 
According to the opening chapter of the Mahabharata, 
the Bharata Sarhhita as originally composed by Vyasa, 
contained 24,000 verses, though Vyasa enlarged it into a work 
of 6,000,000 verses, of which only a lakh now exist. But 
even this Bharata must have been based on lays, ballads 
and versified traditions of the events of the war. Ballads 
and songs recording the doughty deeds of great heroes, 
singing the praises of great warriors, the beauty of queens, 
the pomp of court, could have been composed only when 
the echoes of the war were in men’s ears. From the earliest 
times in the west of India, in the land of the Kuru-Pancalas, 
and in the east, in the land of the Kosalas, the local 
bards were singing the heroic deeds of their tribal heroes. 
These songs could never have been fixed, since they 



480 INDIAN PHILOSOPHY 

were orally transmitted, and should have undergone 
modification in each age. Brahmanism had to reckon 
with these traditions, thoughts and aspirations which were 
not its own. The Bharata is the first attempt at effecting 
a reconciliation between the culture of the Aryans and the 
mass of fact and fiction, history and mythology which it 
encountered. Being nearer the war, it must have been 
a simple heroic poem, with not much of didactic purpose 
or philosophical synthesis. It might have been composed 
about iioo b.c. or so. 1 Soon new material accumulated, 
and the task of assimilation became wellnigh impossible. 
Yet it was attempted, and the Mahabharata is the result. 
It bears on its face the unsatisfactory alliance between the 
folksongs and the superstition of the new communities 
and the religious spirit of the Aryans. Vyasa 1 made the 
best of a bad bargain and wove into a colossal poem the 
floating mass of epic tradition, hero worship, stirring scenes 
of strife and warfare, dressing up the new gods of uncertain 
origin and doubtful morality in the “ cast-off clothes ” 
of the Vedic deities. It is clear that while the ballad stage 
is the first, the Bharata is the next. It must have been 
composed even when the religion was ritualistic and poly- 
theistic. Those portions of the Mahabharata which inculcate 
the worship of the Vedic gods, Indra and Agni, are the relics of 
this stage. Women in those days possessed great freedom and 
caste was not rigorous. There was no element of sectar- 
ianism, no philosophy of the Atman or theory of the 
avataras. Krsna appears as a historical character. The next 
stage of thought represents the period when the Greeks 
(Yavanas), the Parthians (Pahlavas) and the Scythians 
(Sakas) entered the country. We have now the trimurti 
conception that Brahma, Visnu and Siva are different 
forms of the One Supreme, fulfilling the different functions 
of creation, preservation and destruction. The deeds of 
might originally attributed to Indra are now transferred to 
Visnu and in some cases to Siva. What was originally a 
heroic poem becomes a Brahmanical work, and is transformed 

« Mr. Vaidya fixes the date of the earlier work at about 3100 b.c. 

* It is very doubtful whether any one individual can be credited with the 
authorship of the work. 



EPIC PHILOSOPHY 481 

into a theistic treatise in which Visnu or Siva is elevated 
to the rank of the Supreme. The Bhagavadgita, perhaps, 
belongs to this stage, though as a rule the philosophical 
portions of the Mahabharata should be assigned to the 
last stage. In Books XII and XIII we have discussions on 
philosophy, religion, politics and law. When Brahmanism 
ceased to be the religion of a few, by assimilating the indigenous 
beliefs and religious practices of its surroundings, a philosophic 
restatement of the ancient wisdom became necessary. Many 
efforts to combine the absolutism of the Upanisads with 
the theistic beliefs of the people in a synthetic whole were 
made, though not with any genuine principle of reconciliation. 
The author of the Bhagavadgita, with true speculative 
insight and synthetic power, initiates a new philosophical 
and religious synthesis, which forms the background of the 
theistic systems of a later day. Containing within itself 
productions of different dates and authorship, the Maha- 
bharata has become a miscellaneous encyclopedia of history 
and mythology, politics, law, theology and philosophy . 1 

1 We do not know exactly when the Mahabharata was composed. We 
may be pretty certain that about the time of the rise of Buddhism the 
Mahabharata was known. Macdonell is of opinion that “ the original form 
of the epic came into being about the fifth century B.c." This view is 
confirmed by the absence of any reference to Gautama Buddha in the epic. 
Panini is familiar with the characters of the story (Gaviyudhibhyam sthirah, 
8. 3- 95; Vasudevarjunabhyam vun, 4. 3. 98). The Asvalayana Sutras 
mention the work called Mahabharata in addition to the Bharata (Grhya 
Sutras, 3. 4. 4). We have an inscription of the Gupta kings, from which the 
existence of the Mahabharata in that period is evident. The poet Bhasa takts 
many of his plots from the Mahabharata. Asvaghosa refers to the Bharata 
in his Buddliacarita and Saundarananda. Baudhayana in his Dharma Surras 
quotes a verse found in the Yayati upakhyana and another verse found 
in the Bhagavadgita (2. 2. 26 ; 2. 22. 9), and he is said to belong to 400 b.c. 
From all these evidences it may be inferred that the Mahabharata was well 
established about the time of Buddha. We cannot, however, decide with 
any accuracy the particular periods of history represented by its component 
parts Even after the fifth century B.c. we cannot say that it was not 
added to or altered in parts by later writers who wished to harmonise its 
teachings with their own advanced notions of religion and morality. There 
are some who think that parts of the poem are as late as the Puranas, and 
that it was growing till the sixth century a.d "It has been conclusively 
shown that the poem was recognised in a.d 300, and by a.d. 500 was essen- 
tially the same as it now exists ” (Biihler and Kirste : Contribution to tht 
Study of the Mahabharata). In spite of it all, it is not wrong to say that 
the bulk of the work has remained the same from 500 B.c. up till the 
present day. 



482 INDIAN PHILOSOPHY 

The Mahabharata is sometimes called the fifth Veda. 
It is looked upon as a work of authority on conduct and 
society. 1 It is intended to teach even the weak and the 
lowly the rules of ethical conduct. 2 The Buddhist scriptures 
were thrown open to all, while the sacred books of the 
Brahmins were confined to the three higher classes. Hence 
the necessity for a fifth Veda open to all. 

IV 

The Ramayana 

The Ramayana of Valmiki is essentially an epic work, 
and is not of the miscellaneous character of the Mahabharata. 
Its hero Rama, the model of virtue, the pattern of perfec- 
tion, is made the incarnation of Visnu, who took form on 
earth for the repression of wrong and the inculcation of 
virtue. What was originally an epic poem is transformed 
into a Vaisnava treatise. It is not so universal in its 
scope as the Mahabharata. It has the finish and the system 
indicative of no complex authorship. We may, however, 
distinguish two stages in it, the earlier epic phase and the 
later religious adaptation. If we take Books II-VI of the 
Ramayana and leave out of consideration Books I and VII, 
which are admitted to be later additions, we shall see that 
the main substance of the poem is secular. Rama is only 
a good and great man, a high-souled hero, who utilised the 
services of the aboriginal tribes in civilising the south, and not 
an avatar of Visnu. The religion it reflects is frankly poly- 
theistic and external. We have the Vedic gods with Indra as 
their chief. The new divinities of Kama, Kubera, Kartikeya, 
Ganga, Laksmi and Uma, the wives of Visnu and 5iva, 
deified animals like Sesa the snake, Hanumat the monkey, 
Jamba vat the bear, Garuda the eagle, Jatayu the vulture, 
and Nandi the bull, receive prominent mention. Sacrifice 
is the mode of worship. Though Visnu and Siva maintain 

1 Asvalayana Grhya Sutras, 3. 4. 4. 

1 Sayana in his commentary on the Black Yajur-Veda says that the 
Mahabharata and the Puranas are designed to teach the law of duty to women 
and the Sudras, who were not allowed to read the Vedas (see Bibliotheca 
Indica, vol. i.. p. 2). 



EPIC PHILOSOPHY 


483 


their pre-eminence, worship of snakes, trees and rivers 
is also to be met with. Ideas of karma and rebirth are in 
the air. There are, however, no sects. In the second stage 
we have references to the Greeks, the Parthians and the 
Scythians. There is an attempt to make Rama an avatar 
of Visnu. 

For purposes of philosophy and religion, the Ramayana 
is not so important as the Mahabharata, though it reflects 
more truly the customs and beliefs of the times. It is 
sometimes looked upon as a protest against Buddhistic 
monasticism, since it glorifies the domestic virtues and makes 
out that there is no need to give up home life for the sake 
of freedom. 

Since the Ramayana refers to Buddha as a nastika , 1 or 
a denying spirit, its composition is said to be of a later date 
than that of the Mahabharata, though its story may be 
of an earlier period. 

The interesting portions for a student of Indian philosophy 
in the Mahabharata are the Sanatsujatiya, the Bhagavadgita, 
the Moksadharma and the Anugita. When Arjuna asked 
Krsna at the end of the war to repeat what he had told 
him at the commencement, Krsna said that he could 
not command the state of the yoga in which he uttered the 
Gita, and so gave a substitute for it in what is called the Anu 
Gita. Apart from the attempt of the Bhagavadgita to 
reconcile different views, we have in the Mahabharata only 
a collection of different beliefs, a syncretism, but not a 
system. The Anugita points to the existence of a large 
number of philosophical schools. “ We observe the various 
forms of piety to be as it were contradictory. Some say 
piety remains after the body is destroyed ; some say that 
it is not so. Some say everything is doubtful, and others 
that there is no doubt at all. Some say the permanent 
principle is impermanent, others that it exists, still others 
that it exists and does not exist. Some say it is single, 
others that it is twofold, and others that it is both. Some 
Brahmins who know Brahman and perceive the truth 
believe that it is one ; others that it is distinct ; and others 
again, that it is manifold. Some say that both time and 

1 Ayodhya Kaijd^- 

16 * 


VOL. I 



484 


INDIAN PHILOSOPHY 


space exist, others that it is not so.” 1 Conflicting ideas 
are collected together in one whole. We come across the 
polytheism of the Vedas, the monism of the Upanisads, 
the dualism of the Samkhya, the deism of the Yoga, the 
monotheism of the Bhagavatas, the Pasupatas and the Saktas. 
Postponing to the next section a detailed consideration of 
the different religious views, we may here refer to the mass 
of philosophical ideas which were held as the common pro- 
perty of the thinkers of the Mahabharata. 

V 

Common Ideas of the Age 

Since there are different philosophical tendencies in 
the Mahabharata, we cannot say definitely what canons 
of authority it accepts. Generally the Vedic scriptures are 
considered to be valid. Pratyaksa, or perception, anumana, 
or inference, and agarna, or authority, are recognised. 
Sometimes the four canons of the Nyaya system are 
mentioned.* It certainly opposes those who repudiate the 
authority of the Veda. The nastika creed of the dissenters 3 
is refuted by Panca^ikha, a follower of the Samkhya. 4 
The lokayatas are also mentioned. 5 The dialectical pundits 
(hetumantah), who deny the reality of souls and despise 
immortality, “ wander over the whole earth.” 6 A reference 
to the Jains may be found in the passage where a priest 
is said to have “ tramped around Benares, astounding the 
people, clothed in air. . . . like a mad man. ”7 Opposition 
to Buddhism is also found. “ What makes you so glorious ? ” 
asks one woman of another, and the reply is : “I did not 
wear the yellow robe or bark garments, nor go shorn or with 
matted hair.” 8 Heresy and repudiation of the Vedas were 
thought of as landing us in hell and a cycle of low births. 
“ The reason why I was born a jackal,” says a character 
in the Mahabharata, 9 “is that I was a counterfeit pundit, ? 

» Chap. xxiv. * xii. 56. 41. S ii. 31. 70. 

4 Ssantiparva, 218. S i. 70. 46. 6 xii. 19. 23. 

? xiv. 6. 18. 1 xiii. 123. 8; see also xii. 18. 32. 

* xii. 180. 47-48. 



EPIC PHILOSOPHY 


485 


rationalist and critic of the Vedas, being devoted to logic and 
the useless science of reasoning, a proclaimer of logical argu- 
ments, a talker in assemblies, a reviler and opposer of priests 
in arguments about Brahman, an unbeliever, a doubter of 
all, who thought myself a pundit.” The Puranas and the 
Itihasas are also accepted. 1 Here and there there is doubt 
of the value of the Vedic authority. “ Deceitful is the 
Veda .” 3 The Upanisad view, that for those who had 
abandoned routine the Vedas are useless, is perhaps reflected 
here. 

The religion accepted by the Mahabharata is the Vedic 
one, though it carries its past into a greater future. Pre- 
serving its identity, it attempts to do justice to the new 
gods. Indra has grown very weak. Visnu, the solar deity, 
has his attributes embodied in Agni and Surya. Yama retains 
his greatness, though he becomes a judge, a dharmaraja. 
“ Yama is not death as some think. He is one that gives 
bliss to the good and woe to the bad.” 3 Vayu and Varuna 
remain shorn of their prestige. Prajapati is left untouched, 
and for some time, prior to the rise of Siva and Visnu, 
was the highest deity. The early Pali literature of Buddhism 
reflects this stage. The second stage is marked by the 
conception of the trimurti. Brahma, Visnu and Siva 
were regarded as different aspects of the supreme, though 
co-ordinate in rank. Megasthenes was familiar with this 
idea. Visnu and Siva became supreme over other gods, 
though they had not then acquired any clear-cut distinctness. 
They very easily melted into each other. 4 A hymn is 
addressed to Siva having the form of Visnu and Visnu 
having the form of Siva.5 The third stage arises when 
Krsna the epic hero is identified with Visnu. The cult 
of Krsna supersedes both animistic superstitions and 
Vedic ritualism. The dance of Krsna on the head of 
Kallya means the suppression of the -worship of nagas or 
serpents by that of Krsna. The defeat of Indra by Krsna 
symbolises the suppression of Vedic orthodoxy by the Visnu 
cult. 

The henotheistic tendency is still prevalent. “ I am 

1 xii. 343. 20. 1 x i. 329. 6. 

♦ lii. 189. 5. 5 iii. 39. 76. 


» v. 42. 6. 



486 


INDIAN PHILOSOPHY 


Narayana, I am creator and destroyer, I am Visnu, I am 
Brahma, I am Indra the master god, I am king Kubera, 
Yama, &va, Soma, Kasyapa and also Prajapati.” 1 Upani- 
sad monism asserts its rights and reduces the different 
gods into manifestations of the one supreme Brahman. 
Divine immanence is freely taught. The Brahman of the 
Upanisads becomes invested with a distinct personality, 
and is called Isvara, who appears under different names, 
Siva, Visnu, Krsna. 2 Bhakti, or intense love of God, 
which is not motived by any desire, is the essential feature 
of the Mahabharata religion. The un-individualised 
Brahman cannot serve as an object of worship ; the theistic 
religion of the Mahabharata therefore transforms the Brahman 
into an Isvara. It is aware, however, that the impersonal 
absolute is the more real of the two. 3 It is superior to the 
manifested Vasudeva. “ That is real which is indestructible 
and eternal and unmodifiable.”4 The emphasis, however, 
is on the personal Vasudeva, and from the religious point 
of view there is support for it in the Upanisads 5 

The Mahabharata is able to accept different popular 
beliefs on account of its vaguely felt conviction that they 
are all different ways of approaching the one truth. “ In 
all the five systems of knowledge, the same Narayana is 
preached and worshipped according to different methods 
and ideas ; ignorant persons do not know him in this way.” 
We see in the epics the gradual modification of the old 
Vedic religion into modern Hinduism. The Sakta, the 
Pasupata or the f5aiva and the Pancaratra systems, which 
belong to the agama class, and are therefore non-Vedic, 
enter into the Hindu religion. We have also image worship 
in temples, pilgrimages to sacred places gradually introduced. 
Since a knowledge of the different systems of religions 
we meet with in the Mahabharata is essential for under- 
standing the attempts made in the scholastic period to 
interpret the Brahma Sutras, let us deal briefly with them. 

* iii. 189. 5. 

» Patanjah speaks of $iva Bhagavatas; see Mahabhasya, ii. 76. 

S Santiparva, 339. 21-28. 4 Ibid., 162. 10. 

5 See Katha, i. 2. 20 ; Svet. iii. 20 ; vi. 21 ; Mundaka, iii. 2. 3. 



EPIC PHILOSOPHY 


487 


VI 

Durga Worship 

Durga worship is mentioned in the Mahabharata at 
the beginning of the Bhisma parva. Krsna advises 
Arjuna to make an obeisance to Durga before the com- 
mencement of the battle and pray for success. 1 In the 
first stage she is only a virgin goddess worshipped by the 
wild tribes of the Vindhyas. She soon becomes the wife of 
Siva, and is addressed as Uma. In the Markandeyapurana 
and two hymns of the Hari-vamsa, 2 3 she becomes the centre 
of a great cult. Early in the seventh century Bana wrote 
his Candi Sat aka. 

Sakti worship, there is no doubt, prevailed originally 
among the non-Aryans, and was gradually adopted by the 
Aryans. Since she was a fierce goddess looked upon as con- 
trolling the destructive forces of the world, she is made the 
wife of Rudra. Attempts are made to affiliate her with the 
goddesses of the Rg-Veda, RudranI, Bhavanl, etc. Devisukta,3 
which is interpreted as in honour of the primal energy of life, 
is made the basis of Saktaism. The sixth verse of it reads : 
“ I bend the bow for Rudra, to cut off the evil doing hater 
of the Brahman. I fight for man. I pervade heaven and 
earth.” She is the energy drawing forth from Paramatman 
the whole universe from akasa downwards. “ I wander 
like the wind bringing forth all things.” 4 In the Kena 
Upanisad we have Devi bringing the devas, who grew 
arrogant by their victory over the asuras, to their senses 
and finally appearing before Indra in the form of a beautiful 
woman, Uma Haimavati, to offer him supreme knowledge. 

1 Chap, xxiii. Many names are given to her, such as Kumarl (maiden), 

Kali (black or time as destroyer), Kapali (the wearer of skulls), Mahakall 
(the great destroyer), Candi (the fierce), Kantaravasini (the dweller in the 
forest). There is a hymn in the Virataparva (chap, vi) sung by Yudhisthira 
in praise of Durga. She is referred to as the slayer of Mahisa, a goddess 
dwelling in the Vindhya mountains delighting in wine, flesh and animal 
sacrifices. She is also looked upon as Krsna's sister, dark blue in colour 
like him. 

3 Chaps, lix and clxvi ; see also Avalon : Hymns to the Goddess. 

3 R.V., x. 125. « x. 13. 8. 



488 


INDIAN PHILOSOPHY 


She later becomes the mayasakti of Brahman. A philo- 
sophical explanation is offered that the supreme spirit 
cannot perform the three functions of creating, preserving 
and destroying without the help of its energy. When 
Isvara creates, he is dominated by the energy known as 
Vak, or speech, when he preserves, by that of Sri or LaksmI ; 
when he destroys, by that of Durga. Sakti is the Isvari, 
the source, support and end of all existence and life. In 
spite of attempts to aryanise the Sakti cult, the limitations 
of its origin are visible in the practices of some Saktas even 
to-day. 


VII 

The PaSupata System 

In the Mahabharata we find a theology named Pasupata 
centring round the god Siva. 1 The Rudra of the Rg-Veda 
(i. 1 14. 8), the personification of the destructive powers of 
nature, becomes in the Satarudrfya, the lord of cattle, pasu- 
nam patih. In the Brahmanas, Siva becomes the distinctive 
term for Rudra. The Pasupata system continues the tradi- 
tion of Rudra-Siva. 

We have an account of the Pasupata system in Sarvadar- 
sanasaihgraha 2 and Advaitananda’s Brahmavidyabharana. 
Samkara 3 criticises the theology in his commentary on the 
Vedanta Sutras. The five chief categories are the following : 
(1) Kaiana, or cause. The cause is the Lord, the pati, the 
eternal ruler, who creates, maintains and destroys the whole 
existence. (2) Karya, or effect. It is what is dependent 
on the cause. It includes knowledge or vidya, organs or 
kala, and individual souls, or pasu. All knowledge and 
existence, the five elements and the five qualities, the five 
senses and the five organs of action, and the three internal 

■ It is mentioned as one of the five schools of religious doctrine in the 
Narayaniya section (Sfintiparva, 349. 5. 64). In the Vanaparva, Arjuna 
obtains the weapon from Pasupati, the lord of cattle, who is looked upon 
as dwelling in the Himalayas with his wife Uma, Parvatl or Durga, attended 
by a number of beings called ganas, or hosts. He is associated with the 
Rudra of the Rg-Veda who had his hosts of Maruts called ganas, and as 
their leader is styled Gapapati 

• Chap. vi. 1 S.B., ii. a. 37-39. 



EPIC PHILOSOPHY 


489 


organs of intelligence, egoism and mind are dependent on 
the Lord. (3) Yoga, or discipline. It is the mental process 
by which the individual soul gains God. (4) Vidhi, or rules. 
It relates to the practices that make for righteousness. 
(5) Duhkhanta, or the end of misery. It is final deliverance 
or destruction of misery, and obtaining an elevation of 
spirit, with full powers of knowledge and action. The 
individual soul even in the ultimate condition has its own 
individuality, and can assume a variety of shapes and do 
anything instantly. Prasastapada, the early commentator 
on the Vaisesika Sutras, and Uddyotakara. the author of 
the gloss on the Nyaya Bhasya, were followers of this 
creed. 


VIII 

Vasudeva-ICksna 

We now pass to the most important religious doctrine 
of the Mahabharata, the Vasudeva-Krsna cult, which is 
the basis of the Bhagavadglta as well as of modern Vaisna- 
vism. Garbe traces four different stages in the growth of 
the Bhagavata religion. In the first stage it had an existence 
independent of Brahmanism. The central features of this 
stage, which in the opinion of Garbe continued till 300 B.c., 
are the founding of a popular monotheism by Krsna- 
Vasudeva, its alliance with Samkhya-Yoga, the deification 
of the founder of the religion and a deepened religious senti- 
ment on the basis of bliakti. The anti-Vedic character 
of this religion, which is criticised by the commentators of 
the Vedanta Sutras, belongs to this stage. The brahminising 
of the religion, the identification of Krsna with Visnu, 
and the pre-eminence of Visnu, as not merely a great god 
but as the greatest of them all, belong to the second period, 
which is about 300 b.c. The word Vaisnava as the name 
of the sect of Visnu worshippers occurs in the Mahabharata. 1 
In the Vedic worship of Visnu there is no reference to grace. 
The third stage is the transformation of the Bhagavata 
religion into Vaisnavism and the incorporation of the 
elements of the philosophical schools of the Vedanta, the 

1 xviii. 6. 97. 



490 


INDIAN PHILOSOPHY 


Samkhya and the Yoga. This process took place according 
to Garbe from the Christian era up till a.d. 1200. Then 
comes the last stage of philosophic systematisation attempted 
by the great theologian Ramanuja. We are here concerned 
with the first two stages. 

The Bhagavata religion with Vasudeva as the central 
figure, taught to Narada by the Lord in the Svetadvipa, 
is said to be the same as the doctrine of the Harigita 1 and 
that of the Bhagavadgita. 2 

In the Narayanlya section of the Mahabharata is found 
the story of Narada’s visit to Badarikasrama to see Nara 
and Narayana. Finding there Narayana performing some 
religious rites, Narada with a perplexed mind asked whether 
there was anything the supreme Lord had himself to 
worship. Narayana answered that he worshipped the eternal 
spirit, his original substance. Eager to see it, Narada goes 
to Svetadvlpa, where the great Being tells him that he 
is not to be seen by one who is not absolutely devoted to 
him. The religion of Vasudeva is explained to Narada. 
Vasudeva is the supreme soul, the internal ruler of all. 
Living beings are represented by Samkarsana, who is a form 
of Vasudeva. From Samkarsana springs Pradyumna or 
mind, and from Pradyumna Aniruddha or self-consciousness 
arises. These four are forms of the Supreme. The 


1 Santiparva, 346. 

1 34 §- 53 - It I s a monotheistic or ekantika religion. The names Nara- 
yaniya, Satvata, Ekantika, Bhagavata and Pancaratra are used as equiva- 
lents The chief sources for this school are the Narayanlya section of the 
Mahabharata, the Sandilya Sutras, the Bhagavata Purana, the Pancaratra 
Agamas, and the works of the Alvars and Ramanuja. Naradapancaratra 
mentions as the chief works on the subject Brahmavaivarta Purana, the 
Bhagavata, the Visnu Purana, the Bhagavadgita and the Mahabhraata 
(ii. 7. 28-32 ; iii. 14. 73 ; iv. 3. 154). Ramanuja’s works are not useful 
for our present purpose, since they belong to the twelfth century a.d. 
and make a deliberate attempt to reconcile the Upanisad monism with the 
Bhagavata religion. Even the Bhagavata Purana is not of much value 
since, according to tradition, its author took it up when he felt that he did 
not do justice to the devotional element in the Mahabharata (i. 4 and 5). 
It was at the instance of Narada that he made devotion the central feature 
of the Bhagavata Purana. The Narada Sutras and the £andilya Sutras 
are later than the Mahabharata and the Bhagavata, since the former mentions 
Suka and Vyiisa (N.S., 83), and the latter quotes freely from the Bhaga- 
vadgita (9. 15) Thus our chief source is the Narayanlya section of the 
Mahabharata. 



EPIC PHILOSOPHY 


491 


Mandbh&rata suggests that different views were enter- 
tained about the number and nature of these Vyuhas or 
forms. 1 * 3 4 The Bhagavadgita does not mention them, and 
the Vedanta Sutras criticise the theory on the ground 
of its inconsistency with the accepted view of creation. 
There is also a mention of the avataras, Varaha, Narasimha, 
Vamana, Parasurama, Sari Rama, and “ he who will come 
into existence for the destruction of Kamsa at Mathura.” 
Buddha is not mentioned as an avatara. The story of 
Uparicaravasu related by Bhisma to Yudhisthira knows 
nothing of the theory of vyuhas or forms. 1 From it two 
things are clear : that the Bhagavata religion is a 

monotheism, and its way of salvation is devotion or bhakti. 
Slaughter of animals is avoided. It is because Buddha 
made the same protest against animal sacrifices that he 
is made an avatar of Visnu. The religion inculcates a 
combined pursuit of bhakti and karma.3 It does not 
demand ascetic renunciation. 4 

Vasudeva is the first and prominent name of the 
Bhagavat.5 “ The eternal God, mysterious, beneficent and 
loving, should be known as Vasudeva .” 6 The name occurs 


1 Sariitiparva, 348. 57. 

* Uparicaravasu adopted the religion of the Pancaratra system originally 
promulgated by Citrasikhandins. This system was expounded by the 
Ksis in the presence of the great Lord, who said : “You have composed a 
hundred thousand excellent verses, which contain rules for all the affairs 
of men and are in harmony with the Vedas . . . and lay down precepts about 
the religion of action as well as that of contemplation. This sastra will be 
handed down from person to person until it reaches Brhaspati. From him 
the king Vasu will obtain it, and become my devotee.” King Vasu performs 
a sacrifice of horses in which Brhaspati acts as priest and Ekata, Dvita and 
Trita act as overseers, or sadasya. No animal is killed on the occasion. 
The God appears only to the king and accepts his offering. Brhaspati is 
provoked, and the overseers tell him that the great Lord appears only to 
them who are favoured by His grace. They relate the story of the isvetadvipa, 
where " there are men possessing the lustre of the moon, devotees of the god, 
who possess no senses, do not eat anything, are absorbed in Him who is 
bright like the sun. It is there that we heard the great teaching that the 
supreme God is not to be seen by one who is not devoted to Him." See 
Bhandarkar : Vaisnavism. 

3 Jsantiparva, 334-351. 

4 Compare ; Pravrttilaksuija£ caiva dharmo narayanatmakah. §anti, 
347. 80-81. 

5 See B.G., vii. iq. 


6 Bhlsmaparva, chap, lxvi. 



492 


INDIAN PHILOSOPHY 


in the Bhagavata mantra. 1 It is sometimes said that 
the name Bhagavat indicates that the religion is a develop- 
ment of an old Vedic cult. We read in the Vedas of a deity 
called Bhaga, considered to be the bestower of blessings. 
Bhaga gradually came to mean goodness, and according to 
the rules of Sanskrit grammar, the god possessing goodness 
comes to be known as Bhagavat. The worship of such a 
god constitutes the Bhagavata religion. The Visnu Purana 
says that glory (aisvarya), righteousness (dharma), fame 
(yasas), property (sampat), knowledge (jnana), and renun- 
ciation (vairagya), are called Bhaga, and he who possesses 
them the Bhagavat. 2 Gradually Vasudeva became identi- 
fied with Narayana and Visnu. 

From the beginning Visnu was marked out for a 
great destiny. In the Vedas he is the god of three 
strides. He dwells inscrutable in the bright realm of light, 
“ where even the birds dare not fly.” 3 “ To reach the highest 

place of Visnu ” is the ambition of man in the Upanisads.r 
Even in the Vedas Visnu was entrusted with the work of 
the deliverance of man from distress. 5 In the Satapatha 
Brahmana 6 it is said that “men are Visnus.” He is 

< Om namo bhagavate vasudevaya. 

* vi. 5. 74. Tiie Bhagavata religion is also called the SJtvata 
religion, since Vasudeva is giver that name (Adiparva, 218, 12). The Bhaga- 
vata mentions the Satvatas as worshippers oi the Bhagavat (ix. 9. 49). 
They along with Andhakas and Vrsnis were Yadava tribes (Bhaga- 
vata, 1. 14. 25; 3. 1. 29). Mvgasthenes also alludes to them. The 
aryanisation resulted in the identification of Vasudeva with Narayana 
and later Visnu, We cannot be sure that at the time of the Bhagavadglta 
Visnu stands for the supreme reality. In it he is only an Aditya. In the 
Naruyaniya section of the Mahabharata Vasudeva and Narayana are 
identified. The old Vedic conception of two birds dwelling in a tree, friends 
and associates of each other, might have given rise to the stories of the 
eternal friendship of Nara and Narayana, the individual soul and God. The 
onlooker is Narayana, and the eater of the fruit is Nara. Narayana, the 
eternal soul of the universe, is the resting-place of men (XI. B., xii. 341). Manu 
says that the waters were called Naras, and since the Supreme had them 
for His resting-place he is called Narayana (i. 10 ; see also R.V., x. 82. 5 
and 6) He is the origin of the whole world, the Supreme God represented 
as lymg on the body of a huge serpent in the ocean of milk. Metapho r 
apart. He is the self-conscious Lord of the universe confronted by tbe principle 
of not-self. It is from Him that Narada is supposed to get his monotheistic 
religion 

3 R V., i. i 55 . 5 

5 R.V., 6. 49. 13. 


4 Katha, 1. 3, 9. 
6 v. 2. 5. 2-3. 



EPIC PHILOSOPHY 


493 


the great helper of the gods against the asuras according 
to Aitareya Brahmana. He assumes the form of a dwarf 
to recover the earth for the gods from the asuras. 1 * We 
find the name Narayana for the first time in fsatapatha 
Brahmana, 3 * * though there it is not connected with Visnu . 3 

How does Krsna become associated with Vasudeva- 
Narayana ? In the Mahabharata sometimes he is dis- 
tinguished from them. 4 But soon he becomes identified 
with the Supreme. Megasthenes, the Greek ambassador 
to the court of Candragupta (300 b.c.), mentions the fact 
that Krsna was worshipped then at Mathura. If we try 
to trace the ancestry of Krsna, we find it to be the name 
of a Vedic rsi who composed a hymn . 5 He is said to be 
a descendant of Angiras. 6 * In the Chandogya Upanisad we 
find Krsna, the son of Devaki, as a pupil of rsi Ghora ,7 
an Ahgirasa. It is clear that from the time of the Vedic 
hymns down to the Upanisad period there was a tradition 
about Krsna as a Vedic thinker. But in another passage 
of the Rg-Veda Krsna is spoken of as a non-Aryan chief 
waiting on the banks of Amsumatl with an army of 10,000 
to fight Indra. 8 Sir R. G. Bhandarkar believes that a 
nomadic tribe of cowherds called abhiras were worshippers 

1 fsat. Brah , i. 2. 5. 5 ; Tait. Brah., i. 6. 1. 5. * xii. 3. 4. 1. 

3 In Taittirlya Aranyaka, Narayana appears as " the deity, eternal, 
supreme and lord,” and receives the name of ilari (Tait. Ar., x. 11. 1). In 
the Mahabharata Narayana is called an ancient rsi (see also R.V., 10. 90, 
and M.B., v. 49. 5-20; vii. 200. 57). During the period of the Brahmanas 

Narayaija assumes a cosmic character, and in the Mahabharata he is 

identified with Visnu. Thus in the Bhlsnia parva of the Mahabharata, 
Yasudeva, Narayana and Visnu are used as equivalent terms (chaps. Ixv. 
and lxvi). 

« xii. 334. 18. 1 R-V., viii. 74. 

6 See Kausitaki Brah. xxx. 9; Tanini. iv. 1. 96. t iii- 17. 

* vni 96. 13-15. The later legends relating to ICrna's turning the 
Gopas away from the worship of Indra, and the consequent indignation 
of Indra, which resulted in the pouring of incessant rain, and Krsna ’s feat 
of lifting up the Govardhana hill over the heads of the Gopas to protect 
them from the rain, may all be based on tins incident narrated in the 
Rg-Yeda. In the Atharvasaiirhita Krsna is described as having slain the 
giant Kesi. Buddhistic works also mention Ins name (see Lalitavistara.) 
We have evidence to believe that the worship of Krsna was prevalent 
when Jainism arose, for we find that the whole story of Krsna is reproduced 

witli slight alterations in the life of the 22nd 1 Irthankara Arisjanemi, who 
was a famous Yadava. See S.B.E., vol. xxii., pp. 276-279. 



494 INDIAN PHILOSOPHY 

of a boy-god. 1 They were a non- Aryan tribe with unrefined 
manners. The stories of libertinism relating to the life 
of Krsna may have been derived from these wandering 
tribes. 2 According to Mr. Vaidya, Krsna belongs to the 
Yadava race of Ksatriyas, who came in the second invasion 
of the Aryans, a community still pastoral in its habits, which 
found its habitation on the banks of the Jumna. 3 Other 
indologists, like Weber and Dutt, contend that the Pandavas 
were a non- Aryan people, with the peculiar custom of brothers 
marrying a common wife. In them prevailed the Krsna 
cult, and the writer of the Mahabharata tries to show that 
by their devotion to Krsna they were led to victory. 
The wars and incidents of the Pandavas, a people from 
outside the pale of Brahmanism, was worked up with a 
religious motive into the epic, and they were themselves 
admitted into the Aryan fold under the name of the Bharatas. 
Garbe believes Krsna to have lived about two hundred 
years before Buddha, to have been the son of Vasudeva, to 
have founded a monotheistic and ethical religion, and to have 
been eventually deified and identified with the god Vasudeva, 
whose worship he founded. In the Mahabharata we have 
a combination of all traditions about Krsna that survived 
till then, a non-Aryan hero, a spiritual teacher, and a 
tribal god. 

We see in the Mahabharata the process by which Krsna 
is made into a supreme deity. In some places he is repre- 
sented as worshipping Mahadeva.4 There are contexts 
where his divinity is denied. 5 In Sabhaparva Sisupala 
contests Krsna’s claim to rank as god ; Bhlsma defends 
it : “ Whoever says that Krsna is a mere man is of dull 
intellect (mandadhlh).” From this it is obvious that there 
was strong opposition to the deification of Krsna. He 
is sometimes looked upon as the warrior Lord of Dvaraka. 
Occasionally he becomes a religious preacher of monotheism, 
which has for its object of worship Bhagavat, the adorable. 
Sometimes he is identified with Bhagavat himself. The 
Mahabharata contains several layers of thought super- 


1 Mausalaparva, chap. vii. 

3 Epic India, chap, xviii. 

I Muir: O.S.T., iv. pp. 205 s. 


2 Vaisnavism, etc., pp. 36— 38. 
< See Droijaparva. 



EPIC PHILOSOPHY 495 

imposed one upon another in the course of ages representing 
Krsna in all the grades, from a historical character to an 
avatar of Visnu. 

It is clear that the editors of the Mahabharata felt that 
some popular hero must be made the rallying centre to 
counteract the mighty influence of the heretical sects. The 
figure of Krsna was ready to hand. There were, however, 
certain acts which were not characteristic of a divine being 
associated with his life, such as the Rasa-lila, or the circular 
dance with the Gopis, Jalakrida, or water sport, and vastrapa- 
harana, or carrying away of clothes. These demanded some 
explanation. King Pariksit asked Suka to clear his doubt : 
“ The Lord of the universe was incarnate to establish religion 
and destroy irreligion. Did he, being the revealer, master 
and preserver of religious laws, violate them by committing 
the unholy act of adultery ? ” The answer is : “ The viola- 
tion of religious laws by the gods and the daring acts of the 
glorious do not bring any stains, as fire is not stained by 
feeding on impure substances. But those that are not 
gods should never commit such deeds, even in thought. 
If a man foolishly drinks poison in imitation of Siva, he is 
sure to die. The words of the gods are true, but their acts 
are sometimes true and sometimes not." 1 But the ingenuity 
of the Brahmin will not leave it there. He will allegorise 
and attempt to sanctify the whole life of Krsna and mystify 
the atmosphere. The Gopis symbolise people who found 
God by devotion without learning. The desertion of home 
and husband by milkmaids is a symbol of the soul’s self- 
surrender to the heavenly Bridegroom. Brndavana is 
the heart of man. Radha and the Gopis are entangled 
in the maya of the world. The flute of Krsna is the voice 
of God. To follow him means to sacrifice name and fame, 
cast away dignity and self-respect, and give up home, family 
and all. Those who care for social safety and peace cannot 
respond to the call of the infinite. To love God is to take 
up the cross. The surrender of the soul to the heavenly 
Bridegroom w'ho is common to all and special to each — a 
metaphor not peculiar to India — involves the desertion of 
earthly home and husband. The greatest sacrifice of all 

1 Bhagavata, Book x. 33. 26-29. 



496 INDIAN PHILOSOPHY 

must be made before God can be possessed. We hear 
in Vaisnava poetry the constant refrain, “ I am become a 
harlot for thy sake.” Many a folktale is interpreted in this 
mystic manner, and incidents of doubtful morality are meta- 
morphosed into relations of God and the individual soul. 
Yet with the best will in the world to recast history, to alle- 
gorise facts and invent explanations, we cannot accept the 
life of Krsna as described in the Puranas. These incidents 
together with the story of Krsna’s childhood and Balarama’s 
weakness of drink clearly indicate the non-Aryan origin 
of Krsna. If to-day Krsna is the most popular Indian 
god, it is because the author of the Bhagavadgita makes 
him the spokesman of the highest religion and philosophy. 
When Krsna became a god, his other names, Kesava, 
Janardana, etc., were transferred to Vasudeva, and the stories 
of his being the son of Devaki were assigned to the original 
god, and even to-day we have contradictory descriptions of 
him as a high spiritual soul, with keen philosophical insight, 
and a popular hero not quite knightly in his behaviour. 

The Bhagavata system, with its worship of Vasu- 
deva-Krsna, is also called the Pancaratra religion. We do 
not know the origin of this name. In the Padmatantra 
it is said : “ The five other great Sastras are like darkness 
in the presence of this, therefore it is currently known by 
the term Pancaratra.” 1 The name, perhaps, may be due 
to the fact that the system combines five different doctrines. 
We cannot be sure that we have an account of this religion 
in its purity even in the Narayanlya section of the Maha- 
bharata, for the Vedic adaptation seems to have begun 
even then. The Alvars of South India, the earliest of whom 
may be said to belong to the fifth century A.D., adopt this 
doctrine. The term “ alvar ” means one who is immersed 
in god-love. There are twelve alvars recruited from all 
castes, and their works, which are in Tamil, are called 
Prabandhas, or songs in praise of some form of Visnu, 
full of piety and devotion. These constitute the Vaisnava 
Veda. Ramanuja, the commentator of the Vedanta Sutras, 
belongs to a later period, being the sixth in apostolic succession 

1 i. i. 6g. For a different view of the origin of the name see Schrader: 
Introduction to Vdhcaratra. 



EPIC PHILOSOPHY 


49? 


from Nadamuni, who was initiated into the faith by Nammal- 
var. The Bhagavatas are the direct forerunners of Vais- 
navism in India. The followers of the Pancaratra were 
apparently not allowed originally to adopt the Vedic forms 
of worship. They themselves seem to base their views 
on what are called the Pancaratra Agamas. 1 

The Agamas generally classify the topics of discussion 
under the four heads of — (i) knowledge (jnana), (2) medita- 
tion (yoga), (3) construction and establishment of images 
(kriya), and (4) rites (carya or sarhskaras). The central god 
is Vasudeva- Krsna, with his four vyuhas. The imma- 
nence of god Krsna is insisted on : “ Everything is Krsna 
from Brahma to a reed.” * Visnu, the supreme by means 
of his sakti or energy, which has a double aspect of kriya 
and bhuti, answering to force and matter, effects the creation 
of the world. The relation between Visnu and his energy 
is said to be one of inseparable connexion or inherence, 
like that of substance and attribute. Ramanuja accepts 
from the Pancaratra theory the distinct existence of Brahman, 
the individual souls and the world. The way of sacrifice 
yields to the worship of images in temples. The religion 
becomes more emotional. Bhakti, or devotion, is insisted 
on. A chief feature of modern Vaisnavism derived 
from this system is the doctrine of prapatti, or absolute 
self-surrender. God helps those who without any other 
hope fall at His feet. The question arises, How can a just 
God excuse the sinning souls ? The system elevates Laksmi, 
the consort of God, to the place of the mediator. The strict 
justice of God is tempered by the mercy of Laksmi, who 
knows not what it is to punish. 3 This mediator is of the 
very nature of God, and does the work when called upon by 
the devotee. The favour of Laksmi is a necessary prelude 
to that of God Himself. Even past karmas may be forgiven. 


1 Many of them are referred to in Vedantadesika’s Pancaratraraksa 
This, along with the Agama-pramanya of Vamunacarya of the tenth century 
and the Pancaratra section of the Vedanta Sutras (li. 2. 39-42), are our data 
for the system. The Vaisnavite who looks upon the Agamas as revealed 
by Narayana himself never troubles about fixing a date for them. 

1 Abrahma stambaparyantam sarvam Krsnas caracaram (Narada Pan- 
caratra). 

• Nityam ajnatanigraha. 



498 INDIAN PHILOSOPHY 

Prapatti seems to be the way by which the individual soul 
attains to the supreme spirit, and it is quite as efficacious 
as any other method, Samkhya or Yoga. 1 Among the 
worshippers of Visnu there is no caste. Jabala Brahmana 
says: “The people of the Kirata tribe, of the Hunas . . . 
are purified of their sins by their mere contact with those 
who have their heart knit in Visnu.” The followers of 
this school did not very much care for the varnasrama 
(the caste regulations) as did the Smartas, or those who adhered 
to the Vedic sastras. 

It is a debated question whether the Pancaratra, 
Bhagavata or Satvata religion was in its origin Aryan or 
non-Aryan. Some contend that it was non-Aryan, because 
its worship was non-Vedic. It did not adopt the Vedic 
rites or samskaras and its doctrine of the birth of jlvas 
and minds from Samkarsana was opposed to Vedic theories. 
Yamunacarya in his Agamapramanya notices the several 
objections against the authoritativeness of the Agamas 
and refutes them all. The considerations urged against 
are that their contents are of a different spirit from those 
of the Vedas, that they do not mention rites and ceremonies 
like the Agnihotra Qr the Jyotistoma, that they even 
rebuke the Vedas, and that they are not accepted by the 
twice-born or the Dvijas. On the other hand, they are 
practised by the Satvatas, apparently a non-Aryan tribed 
There is too much of black magic and superstition. 3 The 
system is not counted in the traditional fist of doctrines. 
Even Badarayana, if we accept Sarhkara’s view, does not 
support it. It has its own peculiar system of ceremonies, 
branding, etc. To such objections, Yamunacarya replies 
that the system is related to the Vedas, it is accepted as 
authoritative by Badarayana in the Mahabharata and the 
Bhagavata, and also by such reputed seers like Bhrgu and 
Bharadvaja, that the Bhagavatas are the best of Brahmins, 
and that the name Satvata does not refer to a caste, but 
stands for those who possess the quality of sattva in a pre- 
dominant degree. Ramanuja follows Yamunacarya. The 
very need for defence seems to show that it took some 

» §antiparva, 348. 74. ' Warm, 10. 23. 5. 

1 Kshudravidya pracurata 



EPIC PHILOSOPHY 


499 


time for the system to be accepted as Vedic. Some 
of the essential elements of modern Vaisnavism, such as 
image worship, branding the body, the wearing of the 
urdhvapundra (the vertical mark), are due to the Pancaratra 
religion. 

Under whatever name it be called, there is no doubt 
that the religion is a very old one, perhaps as old as Buddhism 
itself, if not older, but since the Narayaniya section in which 
the religion is described speaks of Narada’s adventures in 
the Svetadvipa, or the white island, where the residents 
were ekantins or monotheists, it is sometimes argued that 
the monotheism is borrowed from Christian sources. Dr. 
Seal says : “ This Narayaniya record, in my opinion, contains 
decisive evidence of an actual journey or voyage undertaken 
by some Indian Vaisnavas to the coasts of Egypt or Asia 
Minor, and makes an attempt in the Indian eclectic fashion 
to include Christ among the avatars or incarnations of 
the supreme spirit Narayana, as Buddha came to be included 
in a later age.” 1 Weber is of the same opinion. 2 3 Lassen 
agrees with it. He thinks it probable that certain Brahmins 
might have learnt to know of Christianity in a land lying 
to the north-west of their mother country, and might have 
brought to India some Christian tenets. He believes, 
however, that this land is Parthia, where “ the tradition 
that the apostle Thomas had preached the gospel is old.” 
But monotheism is not unknown in Vedic literature. The 
Chandogya Upanisad mentions the Ekayana religion as 
one of the sastras learnt by Narada.3 The Bhagavata 
religion does not possess any elements fundamentally foreign 
to Indian religious thought. “ For one who is intimate 
with the intellectual life of ancient India the doctrine of 
bhakti is entirely conceivable as a genuine product of 
India,” 4 according to Garbe. “ No shadow of evidence 
has up to now been brought forward to support the theory 
that the conception of bhakti is derived from Christianity. 
The religious significance contained in the word bhakti 


1 Vaisnavism and Christianity, p. 30. 

1 I. A., 1S74. “ An investigation into the origin of the festival of Krsru 

Janma^taml." 

3 vii. 1. 4. 


Garbe : Philosophy of Ancient India, p. 84, 



500 


INDIAN PHILOSOPHY 


has nothing exclusively about it that is specially Christian. 
Not only have devotion to God and faith in Him developed 
themselves gradually in other monotheistic religions, but 
even beyond the circle of monotheistic ideas the two con- 
ceptions are to be found. And particularly in India we 
possess all the essentials on the strength of which we have 
to regard bhakti as ‘ indigenous ’ fact, as Barth says, 
since monotheistic ideas are to be found prevalent from the 
time of the Rg-Veda onward through almost all the periods 
of the religious history of India, and the powerful longings 
after the divine, peculiar to the Indian soul from yore, 
must have developed such sentiments as divine love and 
divine faith in a popularly conceived monotheism.” The 
Svetadvipa, or the white island, is, according to the cosmology 
of the age, a part of India which is north of Mount Meru. 
Christianity, after all, reached India only in the second or 
the third century a.d. We have evidence to show that 
the monotheistic religion prevailed much earlier. Vasudeva’s 
name occurs in Panini’s grammar. 1 According to Sir R. G. 
Bhandarkar, Panini flourished “ in the beginning of the 
seventh century before the Christian era, if not earlier 
still.” 2 Buddhist and Jaina scriptures refer to the bhakti 
school. 3 M. Senart writes that the word bhaktimdn used 
in Theragatha is borrowed by Buddhism from an earlier 
Indian religion. “ If there had not previously existed a 
religion made up of the doctrines of Yoga, of Visnuite 
legends, of devotion to Visnu-Krsna worshipped under 
the title of Bhagavan, Buddhism would not have come to 
birth at all.” 3 Barth says : 5 " The ancient Bhagavata, 
Satvata or Pancaratra sect, devoted to the worship of 
Narayana and its deified teacher, Krsna Devakiputra, 
dated from a period long anterior to the rise of the 
Jains in the eighth century b.c.” In his comment on 
Panini, Patanjali says that Vasudeva is the name of the 
worshipful, that is God. 6 We have also archaeological 
evidence to prove the priority of the Bhagavata religion 
to the rise of Christianity. The Besnager inscription of 


1 iv. 3. 9S. 

3 Therag.ltha, 370. 

5 I. A., 1894, p. 248. 


* Bombay Gazeteer, vol. i., part ii . . p. 141. 
< Indian Interpreter, 1910, pp. 177—178. 
4 J.R.A.S., iyio, p. jG8. 



EPIC PHILOSOPHY 


501 


the second century B.c . 1 mentions the erection of a flagstaff 
with Garuda’s image in it in honour of Vasudeva by 
Heliodora, the Bhagavata. The Ghosundi inscription speaks 
of the worship of Bhagavat Saiiikarsana and Vasudeva. 
A third inscription of the first century b.c. existing at 
Nanaghat contains an adoration of Saiiikarsana and 
Vasudeva. From all this it is evident that the monotheistic 
religion of India is absolutely independent of any foreign 
influences, and is the natural outcome of the life and thought 
of the period. 


IX 

Epic Cosmology 

In cosmology the Mahabharata accepts the Samkhya 
theory, though not consistently. It makes both purusa 
and prakrti aspects of the one Brahman. The world is 
regarded as a development from Brahman. The self is said 
to send out from itself the gunas, the constituents of nature, 
as a spider emits a web. 2 The same idea of the productive 
activity of Brahman is found in other forms. We have 
also the view that from Brahman was created the god 
Brahma, who sprang forth from a golden egg, which forms 
the body of all creatures. The conception of the cosmic 
egg survives. The Samkhya duality becomes more explicit 
sometimes. Nature is other than the purusa, though 
the latter is conceived as cosmic. Both purusa and prakrti 
are derived from one principle. Prakrti creates under the 
control of purusa,3 or purusa impels to activity the 
creative elements. 4 Elsewhere it is also mentioned that 

all activity rests in prakrti, that purusa never acts, and if 
it considers itself as active it is deluded. 5 The idea is also 
found that though creation and destruction are the work 
of prakrti, still prakrti is only an emanation from purusa, 
into which it resolves itself from time to time. 6 We 
do not think that, except by implication, the maya theory is 


* Epigraphica Indxca, vol. x. 
s xii. 314. 12. 

s xii. 222. 15-16; see also B.G., vi. 37. 


» xii. 285. 40. 

4 xii. 315. 8. 

6 xii. 303. 31 3 . 



502 


INDIAN PHILOSOPHY 


contained in the epic. The evolution of the world is 
described after the Samkhya system in many places in the 
Mahabharata. 1 

There is no doubt that the Samkhya ideas were slowly 
maturing in this period, though they were not formulated 
into a system. The chief features of the Samkhya system 
as found in the Mahabharata may be noted, since most of 
the subsequent thought accepts the psychology and the 
cosmology of the Samkhyas, though not their metaphysics 
and religion. The Samkhya enumeration of the elements 
is accepted by the Mahabharata. 2 3 We have a near 
approach to the classical theory in the Anugita,3 where the 
order of development is given. From the unevolved is 
produced the great Mahat, from it individuation or ahamkara, 
from it the five elements, and from them, on the one hand, the 
qualities of sound, smell, etc., and on the other the five vital 
airs, while from individuation arise the eleven organs of 
sense, the five of perception, the five of action and mind. 
The system of the Samkhya is yet distant, since the purusa 
is counted in some passages as the seventeenth, surrounded 
by the sixteen qualities, and not the twenty-fifth. 

Describing the twenty-five elements in many places, the 
Mahabharata adds a twenty-sixth, called lsvara.4 All 
this shows that it was a period when reflection was very 
busy on the Samkhya problems. 

The Mahabharata assumes the doctrine of the gunas. 
The constituents of prakrti are the three qualities of 

sattva (goodness), rajas (passion), and tamas (darkness). 

They are present throughout all things, though in different 
degrees. Beings are classified into gods, men and beasts 
according as the one or the other quality predominates. 5 
These three are the fetters of the soul. “ They are 

seen mixed up. They are attached to one another and 
likewise follow one another. . . . There is no doubt of 
this, that as long as there is goodness (sattva), so long 


1 See Asvamedhaparva, 35. 20-23, and 47. 12-15. 

1 See Santiparva, 303-308 ; Anuglta, xi. 50. 8 ; xii. 306. 39-40. 

3 14. 40-42. 

« Aantiparva, 308; see also 306. 29; 310. 10. 
f Auugita, 14. 36-38. 



EPIC PHILOSOPHY 503 

darkness (tamas) exists. As long as goodness and darkness 
exist, so long is passion (rajas) said to exist, '□hey 
perform their journey together in union and move about 
collectively.” 1 Nilakantha, commenting on this, observes : 
“ However much sattva may be increased, it is still held 
in check by the tamas, and thus there is the continual 
relation of that which checks and that which is checked 
between the three qualities. They exist together though 
varying in strength.” Tamas is the quality of inertia, 
or in man, the spirit of stupor. It aims at the satisfaction 
of the senses. Its end is pleasure. Its character is 
ignorance. If it is controlled, the man is said to be 
temperate. Rajas is the emotional energy exciting 
desires. It makes man restless and long for success and 
power ; when subdued, it has its gentle side of affection, 
pity, love. It is intermediate between tamas, which leads 
to ignorance and falsehood, and sattva, which develops 
insight into reality. Sattva is the intelligent side of man. 
It promotes stability of character and fosters goodness. 
It alone is competent to guide men aright. Its virtue is 
practical wisdom, its end right performance of duty. No 
man is devoid of these qualities. The three qualities have 
their stronghold relatively in mind, life and body. Tamas, 
or the principle of inertia, is strongest in our material nature 
or physical being, rajas in our vital nature, which works 
against the physical, sattva in our mental nature. Strictly 
speaking, they are present in mixed form in every fibre of 
our psychical make-up. Taking up the volitional side of 
conscious life, the tamas element predominates in our lower 
appetites, with their ceaseless recurrence of wants and satis- 
factions. The rajas element prevails in our desires for 
power and profit, for success and adventure. The element 
of sattva aims at a happy balance or adjustment of self to 
environment and an inner harmony . 1 These three by their 
interaction determine the man’s character and disposition. 
All human souls therefore are grouped into inert, restless 
and good. Among the twice-born classes, the Vaisyas, 

* Anuglta, chap. xxiv. 

* Cf. Plato’s three elements of appetite, spirit, reason, and his three 
classes of society. 



504 INDIAN PHILOSOPHY 

or the traders, represent the lowest ; the Ksatriyas, with 
their competitive ways of thinking and efforts to over- 
reach others, form the intermediate stage ; while the Brahmins 
constitute the highest class. When referred to God, the three 
gunas lead to the conceptions of Visnu, Brahma and £iva. 
The gunas are the essential powers of the divine, which are 
not merely existent in a perfect equilibrium of quietude, but 
also in divine action. The tamas in God is a calm subduing 
all actions, the rajas is His will capable of effective and 
blissful action, and the sattva is the self-existent light of 
the divine being. These three qualities which are every- 
where intertwined account for all activities of nature. The 
world is a play of these modes. The variety of phenomena 
arises through the interaction of the equilibrium, motion 
and inertia. “ The gunas are born in gunas and are dis- 
solved in them.” 1 

The teachers of the Samkhya, Kapila, Asuri and Panca- 
£ikha, 2 are mentioned, though there are differences between 
the Samkhya system and that of Pancasikha.3 

We do not agree with Deussen in his view that epic 
philosophy constitutes the transition between the idealism 
of the Vedanta and the realism of the Samkhya. Both are 
assumed in it. Though the Samkhya had not in the epic 
developed many of its characteristic features, still the 
essentials were all there. The Yoga philosophy is assumed, 
though the technical terms of Patanjali’s system are yet 
absent. 4 

In psychology, the Mahabharata accepts the five senses 
of hearing, touch, sight, taste and smell, answering to the 
five elements of earth, water, fire, air and akaia. The 
contact of sense with object is not enough to produce per- 
ception. The feeling has to be conveyed by the manas, to 
buddhi and then to the soul. “ Seeing cannot take place 
by the eye alone -without the aid of mind.”5 Buddhi is 
the deciding factor, since manas is only a transmitting agent. 6 
As to the nature of the soul, some believed with the Samkhya 
that it was an immovable passive spectator of prakrti, the 

• Santiparva, 305. 23. * Anuglta, xii. 319. 59; xii. 218. 14. 

3 See Keith : Samkhya System, pp. 39-40. ♦ See xii. 237. 6-7. 

5 Santiparva, 311. 17. * Ibid., 251. 11. 



EPIC PHILOSOPHY 


505 


source of action and change, sensation and thought. The 
atomic character of soul is also mentioned with approval. 
In addition to the individual souls, it believed in a supreme 
soul, or Purusottama. The Upanisad theory is of course 
present. The Atman is called Ivsetrajna when bound in 
body, and Paramatman when freed from it and the gunas. 1 
The conception of the lihga sarira, or the subtle body, is also 
to be met with.* 


X 

Ethics 

Ethics as the pursuit of happiness is given an important 
place in the Mahabharata. “ All beings desire pleasure 
and seek to avoid pain.” 3 " What we desire is pleasure 

(sukham), and what we hate is pain (duhkham).”r In this 
world the two are mixed up. 5 But both pleasure and pain 
are anitya, or ephemeral. The goal of human endeavour 
is to gain a state where we can accept pleasure or pain 
with calm and composure. 6 Bharma, or righteousness, is 
the stable condition which gives man perfect satisfaction. 
It helps him to gain salvation as well as peace and happiness 
on earth. 

Though dharma leads to moksa, the two are distinguished 
as the means and the end. In the enumeration of the four 
ends of man (purusarthas) dharma, artha (wealth), kama 
(desire), and moksa, the two are distinguished. The 
rules for gaming salvation constitute the moksa dharma. 
In the narrower sense, dharma means the ethical code as 
distinct from the religious, though it has also the freedom 
of the soul in view. 

Apart from certain general principles, like truth-speaking, 
non-violence, dharma is relative and dependent on the 
conditions of society. It has always a social implication. 
It is the bond which keeps society together. 7 If we do 

1 See Sdiitiparva, 1S7. 24. * See Vanaparva, 296. 16. 

3 Santiparva, 139. 61. ♦ Ibid., 295. 27. 

s Ibid., 190. 14 ; 25. 23 ; Vanaparva, 260. 49. 

4 Santiparva, 25. 16. 

7 “ Dharanad dharmam ity ahur dharmo dharayate prajalj.’ Kama 
paiva, 69. 59. 



506 


INDIAN PHILOSOPHY 


not preserve dharma, there would be social anarchy, and 
wealth and art will not flourish. Dharma develops the 
solidarity of society. 1 It aims at the welfare of all creation. 2 * * * 
“ Whatever is not conductive to social welfare, or what 
ye are likely to be ashamed of doing, never do.” 3 According 
to the Mahabharata, the sum total of duties is contained 
in the maxim, “ Thou shalt not do to others what is dis- 
agreeable to thyself.” 4 The caste duties are ordained on 
account of their instrumental value. “ To support the 
state by force and not shaving one’s head is the duty of 
a Ksatriya.” 5 Of course, the really moral virtues are 
regarded as superior to the caste functions. ” Truth, 
self-control, asceticism, generosity, non-violence, constancy 
in virtue — these are the means of success, not caste nor 
family.” 6 * “ Virtue is better than immortality and life. 
Kingdom, sons, glory, wealth — all this does not equal one- 
sixteenth part of the value of truth. ”7 Though women had no 
right to the Vedic sacrifices, they were allowed to go on 
pilgrimages, read epics and worship God in spirit and under- 
standing. 8 * 

Dharma is not conceived in any hedonistic spirit. It is 
not the mere satisfaction of desires. Accumulation of pleasures 
cannot give us true happiness. “ The desire for happiness 
does not cease by the mere enjoyment of pleasures.”9 What- 
ever we get, we try to get beyond. “ The silkworm dies of 
its wealth.” 10 Nothing finite can satisfy the hunger for the 
infinite. It may be necessary for us to suffer for the sake 
of dharma. True joy entails suffering. 11 Discontent is 
the spur of progress. 12 We should control our minds and 
tame our passions. When we become purified in heart 
and possessed of truth we are not likely to go wrong for fear 


1 Lokasamgraha or samajadharana. * Sarvabhutahitam. 

3 Santiparva, 124. 66; 261. 9; 109. 10. 4 Pandit, 1S71, p. 238. 

s "Danda eva hi rajendra ksatradharmo na mundanam.” Santiparva, 

23. 46. 

6 iii. 181. 42. 7 iii. 34, 22. 

8 iii. 37. 33 ; see also iii. 84. 83. 

9 Na jatu kamah kamanam upabhogena samyati. Adiparva, 75. 49. See 

also Manu, ii. 94. 

10 xii. 330. 29. 11 Vanaparva, 233. 4. 

•• Sabhaparva, 55. xi. Asamtosa £riyo mulam. 



EPIC PHILOSOPHY 


507 


of offending men or avoiding pain. The development of 
this attitude requires discipline of mind and will. In some 
places extreme asceticism is advocated. Since pleasure 
and pain are interdependent, the only way of freeing our- 
selves from them is by the destruction of trsna, or thirst. 1 
Through training we acquire a state incomparably greater 
than the satisfaction of desire or the gaining of Indra’s 
heaven. 2 There does not seem to be any consistent attitude 
towards yoga and asceticism in the Mahabharata. We hear 
of rsis standing on one leg, or devoured by vermin, on 
the other hand those who are easily irritable like Durvasas. 
The idea of tapas is prominent, though we hear sometimes 
of protests against it. “ The red garment, the vow of 
silence, the threefold staff, the water-pot — these only lead 
astray. They do not make for salvation. ”3 Retirement 
from the world is not allowed until the individual fulfils the 
duties of the other stages. A story is related in the Maha- 
bharata which points out how very important it is to live in 
the world before leaving it. An anchorite who had left 
the world before marrying came in his wanderings to a 
terrible place, the pit of hell. There he found his father 
and grandfather and all his ancestors suspended one below 
another on the open mouth of the abyss. The rope which 
prevented them from falling into it was slowly being gnawed 
by a mouse, representing the force of Time. So many well- 
known voices reminded him of accents he heard when a 
child appealing in the words “ save us," “ save us.” The 
only hope of salvation for the long line of ancestors was the 
birth of a son. The anchorite understood the lesson, 
returned home and married. 

If we are to fulfil our duties as members of society, how 
are we to know what our duties are ? The pure and perfect 
are laws unto themselves. The imperfect have to accept 
laws made by others and recognised by society. Acara, 
or custom, is the main rule. 4 The rules will assume the 
form of commands and feel like restraints, since they check 

1 Santiparva, 25. 22 ; 174. 16. 

1 Ibid., 174. 48 ; 177. 49. 

5 xii. 321. 47. 

« Anu£a£anaparva, 104. 157 ; Manu, i. 108. 

17 


VOL. X 



508 


INDIAN PHILOSOPHY 


the superficial tendencies of our nature. 1 If conflicts of 
duties arise we have to follow the example of the great. 
The need of a lovable personality to inspire and influence 
is recognised. “ Logic is not conclusive, the scriptures 
differ, the saying of no rsi is valid, the truth of dharma 
seems to be hidden in secret ; the way of the great is to 
be followed.” 2 * * * The truly great are the atmajnanis, or those 
who possess spiritual knowledge. 

Some general rules are prescribed, such as, avoid extremes. 3 
Even too much of patience is forbidden. 4 Though the 
principles of truth and ahiihsa are recognised as imperative, 
still the Mahabharata contemplates exceptions to them. 5 
The law of truth speaking has no intrinsic value, since truth- 
fulness, which means love of humanity, is the only uncon- 
ditioned end. 6 * Yet knowing the danger of allowing ex- 
ceptions to rules the Mahabharata insists on prayascitta, 
or purification, for those who transgress the law of truth- 
speaking.7 

Sin is recognised and the significance of confession with 
repentance is understood. The true penitent should say, 
“ I will not do so again.” Bhakti, or loving faith in God, 
is regarded as a means of attaining moral purity. In some 
passages it is said that we can gain the highest only by 
wisdom and not karma, however good and meritorious. 
We pass from birth to birth, “ so long as the piety which 
dwells in the practice of concentration of mind for final 
emancipation has not been learnt.” 8 * 

The Mahabharata believes in the force of karma, or the 
fatality of the act. It accepts the Upanisad theory that 
all creatures are bound by karma and are released by wisdom. 9 
Sometimes the karma of the forefathers affects even their 
descendants. 10 Attempts are made to reconcile the law of 

1 See AHmamsa Sutras, i. i. 2; M.B., Santipjrva, 29. 4. 29. 

* Vanaparva, 312. 115. 3 Ati sarvatra varjayet. 

I Vanaparva, 28. 6 and 8. 5 Santiparva, 109. 15-16. 

6 Yad bhutahitam atyantam etat satyam matam mama. Santiparva, 

j-9- 13 ; 287. 16. 

7 viii. 104-109. 8 Anuglta, iii. 23. 

9 “ Karmana badhyate jantun vidyaya tu pramucyate.” Santiparva, 

2(0. 7. 

10 Ibid., 129. See also Manu, iv. 170, and Adiparva, bo. 3. 



EPIC PHILOSOPHY 


509 


karma with the freedom of man. While the general tendency 
of the karma theory is to the effect that there is no room 
for independence by the side of its iron necessity, still there 
are redeeming features. Human effort can modify karma. 
Karma is compared to a fire which we can by our effort 
fan into a flame or extinguish altogether. Different kinds 
of karma are recognised : prarabdha, samcita and agami. 
The karmas that have begun to bear fruit in connection 
with this body from among the stock of impressions of 
actions in the previous human birth are called prarabdha- 
karmas. The other impressions due to the past birth are called 
samcita, or seed-like impressions. Those impressions newly 
received by actions in this life are called agami karmas. The 
two latter can be overcome by real jhana and expiatory 
rites, while the prarabdhakarmas cannot. By the grace 
of God we can destroy the force of samcita and agami. It 
is also admitted that success in any enterprise depends not 
merely on karma, but on the effort of the individual. The 
operation of the law of karma does not, however, limit 
the power of God. The law of karma is an expression of 
the nature of God. Visnu is said to be the embodiment of 
the law, its ground and energy. 1 

On the question of future life we have no clear account 
in the Mahabharata. The way of the gods is distinguished 
from that of the fathers, and a third place of hell is admitted. 
Immortality is not “ living glorious like a king.” 2 It is eternal 
happiness in a heaven where there are no sufferings of hunger 
or thirst, death or old age. It is the final condition of bliss 
to be attained by a true yogin. To the warrior, “ happiness 
in Indra’s heaven ” is promised. The stars were looked 
upon as the souls of the departed sages. Arjuna finds 
them to be great heroes slain in battle. The highest 
goal, however, is declared to be union with God. The 
Samkhya theory that the spirit is freed from empirical 
existence when it realises its distinction from nature is also 
referred to. “ When an embodied self properly perceives 
the self concentrated, then there is no ruler over him, since 
he is the lord of the triple world. He obtains various 
bodies as he pleases ... he attains Brahman.”3 

» M.B., xiii. 149. • -'ii. 71. 17. J Anuglta, 4. 



510 


INDIAN PHILOSOPHY 


XI 

The Svetasvatara Upanisad 

Some of the later Upanisads belong to this period, and 
purport to restate the teaching of the early Upanisads. 
They mark an advance in thought and reflect the growth 
of the mind of the country in the intervening period. They 
attach themselves to some tendency of religion or school 
of philosophy. There are Upanisads which specifically 
teach the Yoga practices or the Samkhya principles or the 
Vedanta system. The Jabala upholds an extreme asceticism 
and asks us to root out all desires. The Maitri Upanisad 
also adopts a pessimistic attitude. 1 It makes a synthesis of 
the Samkhya and the Yoga views. An attempt is made to 
trace the twenty-four tattvas of the Samkhya system to the 
supreme Brahman. The Maitri, the Dhyanabindu, and the 
Yogatattva Upanisads extol the Yoga method. The 
Amrtabindu Upanisad teaches that the jivas are parts of 
Brahman in the sense that limited spaces are parts of one 
universal space. It gives an advaitic interpretation. “ That 
verily is partless Brahman which is beyond all thought, 
unstained. Knowing ‘ that Brahman am I,’ one becomes 
immutable.” The one appears as many on account of 
upadhis, or limitations. “ As one and also as many is He 
seen, like the moon in water.” 2 The Kaivalya Upanisad 
makes sannyasa, or world renunciation, the only path to 
moksa.3 It insists on jnanap and argues the non-dependence 
of the self on objects. “ Whatever in the three states (of 
waking, dreaming and sleeping) is the object of enjoyment, 
the enjoyer and the enjoyment itself, from these distinct 
am I, the witness, the pure intelligence, the ever good. ”5 Some 
other Upanisads insist on contemplation, worship of a per- 
sonal god and symbolic meditation. There are Upanisads 
which make out that Visnu or £iva is the supreme Lord 
of the universe, and insist on the path of devotion. The 
Mahanarayana, the Ramatapanniya, the fsvetasvatara, the 

1 i. 2-4. * 8 and 12. J i. 1. 

< 9 and 10. 5 18. 



EPIC PHILOSOPHY 


511 


Kaivalya and the Atharvasiras Upanisads are examples. 
Most of these are chiefly occupied in reconciling the con- 
flicting tenets of the Samkhya, the Yoga and the Vedanta 
philosophies, and belong to a period posterior to the formula- 
tion of the systems. It may be useful to describe the contents 
of the £vetaivatara Upanisad since we have in it an 
attempt parallel to that of the Bhagavadgita, with this 
difference that 3iva is here the supreme Lord. 

It is a post-Buddhistic Upanisad, since it is familiar 
with the technical terms of the Samkhya and the Yoga 
philosophies. It mentions the name of Kapila, though 
^ariikara believes that the name refers to Hiranyagarbha, 
who is brown or gold coloured. The reference to the she- 
goat of three colours 1 is sometimes taken as an indication 
of the three gunas of the Samkhya philosophy. But Ssamkara 
interprets it as a reference to the three original elements 
of the Upanisads, fire, water and earth. Chapter ii of 
the Upanisad is full of references to the Yoga system. 
The word “linga” is used perhaps in the Nyaya sense. 2 
This Upanisad seems to assume a knowledge of Buddhistic 
speculations such as those of time (kala), nature (svabhava), 
or succession of works (karma), or chance, or elements, or 
purusa. In speaking of the highest reality the Upanisad 
uses such names as Hara, Rudra, Siva. 3 The popular 
god of Brahmanism is given the attributes of Brahman. 

Deussen calls the SvetaSvatara Upanisad “ a monu- 
ment of theism,” for it teaches a personal god, creator, 
judge and preserver of the universe. Hara the Lord rules 
over the individual selves and the world of matter. The 
Upanisad repudiates the theory of naturalism, which makes 
svabhava the cause of the universe. 4 The latter theory 
believes that the universe is produced and sustained by 
the natural and necessary action of substances according 
to their owm properties. On such a view there would be 
no need for a supreme being. 

lhe reality of God cannot be proved by logic. It can 
only be realised by faith and meditation.5 “ When absorbed 

■ iv. 5. 1 vi. 9. 

1 i. io ; iii. 4 and 7; iv. 10 and 12. 

4 vi. 1. J vi. 13 



512 


INDIAN PHILOSOPHY 


in this concentration the yogi sees by the true nature of 
his own self, which manifests like a light the true nature 
of Brahman, which is unborn, eternal, free from all effects 
of nature, he gets released from all bonds.” 1 " He has 
no visible form ; no one sees Him with the eye. Those who 
know Him by the heart and understanding, as seated in 
the heart, become immortal.” 3 He is the master of nature 
and soul, the cause of bondage and release, the eternal of 
all things, the self-born. 3 Divine immanence is also admitted. 
He is the dweller in the heart of man concealed in all beings. 
“ Thou art woman, thou art man, thou art the youth and 
even the maid, thou art the old man trembling on his staff, 
thy face is the universe.”4 

The Upanisad is aware of the reality of the impersonal 
Brahman, of which the three tendencies or developments 
are God, world and self. “ Where there is no darkness, 
there is neither day nor night, neither existence nor non- 
existence, there is the all-blessed even alone. ”5 He is 
called " nirguna,” though theistic interpreters say that 
this word means that the Supreme is devoid of evil qualities. 6 
There is no doubt that the Svetasvatara admits the reality 
of a supreme Brahman above the changing world,? beyond 
space, 8 imperturbable, free from change becoming and 
causality. 9 It is the pure basic consciousness by the light 
of which everything shines, 10 and is described as “ without 
parts, without action, without faults, without ignorance 
or misery.” 11 From this Supreme three unborn elements 
proceed, the all-knowing God, the imperfect self, and the 
world of prakrti, which has in it the materials of enjoyment 
and suffering. 13 These three are not ultimately different. They 
are three aspects of the one Brahman. 3 3 The absolute of the 
Upanisads becomes the highest element, an individual among 
individuals. The personal Lord is the composite Brahman, 
the eternal support of jiva and matter.M All theism has 
this ambiguity about it. The religious needs of human 

i ii. 15. 1 iv. 20. 3 vi. 16 ; vi. 7 ; vi. 13. 

» ai. 11. 14. 16 ; iv. 3. See also Mahanarayana, ii. 7; Kaivalya, 9 and 10. 

5 iv. 18. 6 vi. 11. 7 iii. 14. « iii. 20. 

9 v. 13 ; vi. 5. '• vi. 14. 11 vi. 19. »» i. 9. 

*3 i. 12. Tnvidham brahmam etat. See also i. 7. 

>4 Samyuktam etat. 



EPIC PHILOSOPHY 


513 


consciousness demand that the ultimate principle is to be 
conceived as good, 1 the friend and refuge of all, 2 * * the giver 
of desired objects. 3 Since it is hard to contemplate an im- 
personal Brahman, a personal lord is provided. 4 “ Brahman 

is conscious intelligence, one without parts, without a 
body. For helping the devotee in his practice of devotion, 
symbols and forms have been attributed to Him.” 5 The 
Svetasvatara identifies the two, the personal and the im- 
personal, though it makes the personal the creation of the 
impersonal Brahman, if such an act as creation be allowed. 
In relation to the world and the individuals in it, the absolute 
assumes personality. So long as the individual clings to 
his own individuality, the absolute is an other and so a 
personal god. But when the individual surrenders his 
individuality, the two become one. 

We come across the theory of maya, and God is said to 
be the controller of maya. The Samkhya account is accepted 
with modifications. Prakrti ceases to be an independent 
power, but becomes of the very nature of God. 6 The world 
is created by God’s own power (devatma£akti).7 “ As 
a spider spins its web with threads from its own body, so 
has the one God brought forth the world substance from out 
His own being and covered Himself therewith.” 8 The God 
makes manifold the one. 9 There is, however, no suggestion 
that the world is a delusive appearance. It is admitted 
that it hides from our vision the supreme reality. 10 The 
world is maya, since we do not know how the impersonal 
develops into Isvara, the world and the souls. Mava in the 
sense of divine power is also admitted. Prakrti is called 
maya, since the self-conscious Isvara develops the whole 
world through the force of not-self. Maya in the sense 
of avidya is recognised, since the display of the world hides 
the one spirit in it all. These different significations are 
not irreconcilable, though confusion wall result if we do 
not carefully distinguish them. 

The theory of kalpas is put forth as a compromise between 

1 iii. 5. * iii. 17. 3 iv. 11. « Kaivalya, 14. 

5 Ramatapar.Iya, i. 7. See Kaivalya, iS. 

6 iv. 9-10. 7 i. 3. 8 vi. 10. 

> vi. 12. Ekalj ilipam bahtidha yaij karoti. '• v. 1. 



514 


INDIAN PHILOSOPHY 


the accounts of creation given in the Upanisads and the 
endlessness of samsara. According to the latter, actions of 
each life-history issue in the next life. Each life thus pre- 
supposes an earlier and there cannot be any first life, and 
so there cannot be any creation of the world at a particular 
point. We yet hear of the creation of the world as an event 
recurring periodically from all eternity. The universe 
once created persists through an entire kalpa, or world period, 
after which it returns into the supreme God, only to issue 
again from Him. The cause of this re-issue is that the works 
of the soul still survive and demand a fresh creation or a 
renewed existence for their expiation. The idea of a 
periodical dissolution and recreation of the universe is 
common to the Bhagavadgita, the fsvetasvatara and epic 
thought. 1 “ He dwells in all creatures and burning with 
fury at the end of time, He as lord dashes to pieces all created 
things.” 2 * * * “He is the God who many times spreads forth 
one net after another in space and again draws it in.” 3 
The later Upanisads make much of this idea. “It is 
He who, when the universe is dissolved, remains alone on 
the watch, and it is He who then (again) from the depths of 
space wakens to life the pure spirits.” 4 For the single 
creation of the Upanisads, we get an eternally recurring 
process, a recreation occurring after each dissolution, deter- 
mined by the actions of the souls. 

Being a theistic religion, the Svetasvatara draws a dis- 
tinction between the worshipper and the worshipped, 5 soul 
and God, though it is a distinction of degree. By medi- 
tating on God, by devoting oneself to Him, the ignorance of 
man is dispelled. 6 Bhakti is inculcated and the grace of God 
is said to be the cause of the freedom of man.? But God is not 
capricious and in granting His favours is guided by certain 
principles. The doctrine of prapatti, or self-surrender, is 
suggested. 8 There is an appearance of conflict between 
meditation and worship. “ This absolute Brahman should 

1 B.G., ix. 7 ; see also viii. 17-19. - iii. 2. §vetasvatara Up. 

3 v. 3 ; see also vi. 3-4. 4 Maitrl Up., vi. 17. 

5 iv. 6-7; i. 8. 6 1. 10; iv. 4-6. 

7 iii. 20; see also i. 16. 2. 2. 3. 12. 6. 6 ana 21 . 

1 vi. 18. 



EPIC PHILOSOPHY 


515 


be thought as eternal and as always in one’s own soul, 
for beside Him there is nothing to be known ; knowing 
the individual soul as the enjoyer, the objects of enjoyment, 
and dispenser, all these three even as Brahman, he obtains 
liberation.” 1 

The soul after death has to take one of the three paths : 
that of the gods acquired by knowledge, that of the fathers 
acquired by good karma, and the lower one which evildoers 
traverse. 2 We are released from all bonds when we know 
the Creator.3 Till then, we shall have to assume various 
bodily forms in accordance with the nature of our desires. 
“ In this wheel of Brahma (brahma-cakra), which is the 
support as well as the end of all beings, which is infinite, 
roams about the pilgrim soul when it fancies itself and the 
supreme Ruler different ; it obtains immortality when it 
is uplifted by Him.” 4 

XII 

The Code of Manu 

Before we take up the Bhagavadgita we may refer briefly 
to the Code of Manu, to which a high position is assigned 
among the smrtis. Attempts are made to relate the author 
of this law book with the Manu mentioned in the Vedas . 5 
In the Rg-Veda he is often called the father Manu. 6 He 
is the founder of the social and moral order, who first settled 
the dharma. He is the progenitor of mankind. Though 
he may not be an individual law-giver, the dharmasastra 
ascribed to him is held in great respect. “ A smrti opposed 
to Manu is not approved.”? 

Sir William Jones assigns to the Code of Manu a very 
early date, 1250 B.c. Schlegel holds that its date cannot 
be later than 1000 b.c. Monier Williams puts it at about 
500 b.c. 8 Weber considers the text to be more recent 
than the latest parts of the Mahabharata. The author 
is familiar with Vedic literature, and refers to previous 

1 i. 12. » v. 7. J v. 13. 

4 i. 6. i R.V., viii. 27 

* R.V., i. 80. 16 ; i. 124. 2 ; ii. 33. 13. 

7 See Taittiilya Samhita, ii. 2. 10. 2 ; iii. 1. 9. 4. 

* Indian Wisdom, p. 215. 

17 * 


VOL. I 



516 


INDIAN PHILOSOPHY 


legislators and traditions. Weber, Max Muller and Burnell 
think that the versified edition of the Manavadharmasastra 
is a later rendering of an older treatise in prose. It is said 
to be “ a work belonging to the Manavas, one of the six 
subdivisions of the Maitrayaniya school of the Black 
Yajur-Veda, of which a few adherents still exist in the Bom- 
bay Presidency.” In support of this opinion Burnell quotes 
Whitney. 1 From the nature of its style and language, 
the Code of Manu is assigned to the epic period. Like the 
Mahabharata and the Puranas, this book is of a popular 
character intended for those who cannot get to the fountain 
head. It shows the close relation between law and religion. 
Its main purpose is not philosophy. Medhatithi recognises 
the philosophical portions to be more or less prefatory in 
their character. The philosophical views found in chapters 
i and ii are substantially the same as those of the Puranas. 

As Colebrooke asserts in his essays, we have in Manu the 
Pouranik Sarhkhya mixed up with the Vedanta. 2 The account 
of creation given in Manu has nothing distinctive about it. 3 
It is based on the hymn of creation of the Rg-Veda. The 
ultimate reality is Brahman, which soon manifests a dual- 
ism between the self-existent Hiranyagarbha and darkness. 
“ He desiring to produce beings of many kinds from his 
own body, first with a thought created the waters and placed 
his seed in them. That seed became a golden egg equal 
to the sun in brilliancy ; in that egg he himself was born 
as Brahma, the progenitor of the whole world . . . that 
divine one who resided in the egg divided it into two halves, 
from which he formed heaven and earth, and between them 
the middle sphere, the eight points of the horizon and the 
eternal abode of the waters. . . . Thence he drew forth 
the mind, the self-sense, and then the great principle soul and 
all products affected by the three qualities, and in their 
order the five organs which perceive the objects of sensation.” 
Regarding the ultimate metaphysical position of the book, 
much discussion centres round the statement : " This existed 
in the shape of darkness unperceived, destitute of distinctive 
marks, unattainable by reasoning, unknowable, wholly 

* trurnell : The Ordinances of Manu, Introduction, p. xviii. 

* Miscellaneous Essays, vol. i., p. 249 . 3 i. 5 0. 



EPIC PHILOSOPHY 


517 


immersed as it were in deep sleep.” 1 Darkness (tamah) 
is generally interpreted as mGlaprakpti, the root evol- 
vent of the Samkhya philosophy. “ Tamobhutam ” means 
absorbed in this prakrti. Raghavananda, the Vedantin 
commentator, makes “ tamah ” mean avidya, or ignorance. 
The world is said to be evolved from the darkness through 
the causal efficiency of Hiranyagarbha in the order accepted 
by the Samkhya system. The world is also called the £arira, 
or the body of the Hiranyagarbha, and the souls his creation. 
The explanation of the account of creation varies with the 
opinions of the critics themselves. The doctrine of gunas, 2 
the conception of trimurti,3 and the idea of suksmasarira,4 
or the subtle body, are all to be met with. 

The Code of Manu is essentially a dharmasastra, an ethical 
code. It glorifies custom and convention at a time when 
they were being undermined. The loosening of traditional 
doctrine lightened the hold of dogma and authority. 
Respectability is the reply of common sense to reckless 
romanticism. Manu bases his ordinances on ancient usages 
which prevailed in the Hindu settlements on the banks 
of the Ganges. He admits Vedic sacrifices 5 and regards caste 
as an ordinance of God. 6 He favours asceticism, and yet he 
tells us that we have to surrender only the desires opposed to 
dhaima.7 Along with much that is defective there are some 
flashes of genius and insight. “ To be mothers were women 
created, and to be fathers men.” 8 ‘‘He only is a perfect man 
who consists (of three persons united), his wife, himself and his 
offspring.” The husband is declared to be one with the 
wife.9 Social duties are to be fulfilled first and foremost. 
“ A twice-born man who seeks final liberation, without 
having studied the Vedas, without having begotten, and 
without having offered sacrifices, sinks downwards.” 10 “ The 
tapas of a Brahmin is concentrated study, of the Ksatriya 
protection of the weak, of the Vaisya trade and agriculture, 
of the Sudra service of others.” 11 

1 Asld idaiii tamobhutam aprajnatam alaksanam 

Apratarkyam avijneyam prasuptam iva sarvatah. i. 5 
» xii. 24. 3 i. 10. « xii. 16-17. 5 iii. 7 6 - 6 >■ 3 1 - 

7 iv. 176. s ix. 96. ? ix. 45. '• vi. 37. 

11 See Bhagavan Das : Hindu Social Organisation and The International 
Journal of Ethics, October, 1922, on The Hindu Dharma. 



518 


INDIAN PHILOSOPHY 


Moral conduct is that which has a predominance of the 
quality of sattva and that which does not make for 
future existence. 1 He is the ideal hero who has conquered 
all. Pain is subjection to other people and pleasure is 
subjection to self. 2 * * “ He who sacrifices to the self alone, 
equally recognising the self in all creative beings and all 
creative beings in the self, becomes self-governing, self- 
luminous.” 3 Morality, however, is relative to the effects 
of our acts on future life. Conduct which has a tendency 
to bring about a good birth is good conduct, while that which 
brings about a bad birth is bad conduct. But both of these 
are inferior to that supreme conduct which enables us to 
reach perfection or cessation from rebirth. 

We cannot say that Manu is an exclusive advocate of 
the established order whose system provides no scope for 
progress. There are according to him four ways of deter- 
mining right and wrong : Veda, smrti, acara and conscience. 
The three former make for social order, but social progress 
is guaranteed by the last. We can do what is agreeable 
to our conscience (atmanah priyam).4 We are allowed 
to do whatever is convincing to our reason. 5 Manu admits 
the value of the inner witness, the voice of God within us, 
the antaratma. 6 


REFERENCES 

Telang : Bhagavadglta, AnugTta, etc., S.B.E., vol. viii. 
Hopkins : The Great Epic of India, chap. iii. 

C. V. Vaidya : Epic India, chap. xvii. 

R. G. Bhandarkar : Vaisnavism, Saivism, etc. 

Hem Chandra Ray Chaudhuri : Early History of the Vaisnava 
Sect. 

Bixhler : The Laws of Manu, S.B.E., vol. xxv. 


1 xii. 89. 

J iv. 1. 160. Sarvam parava£arh duljkham sarvam atmavaSarh sukham. 

J xii. 91 ; see also 118. •, ji, I2 . 

J Manafj putam samicarot, vl. 46, « i v . 161. 



CHAPTER IX 

THE THEISM OF THE BHAGAVADGlTA 


The importance of the Gita in Indian thought — Its universal significance 
— Date — Relation to the Mahabharata — The Vedas — The Upanisads — 
Buddhism — The Bhagavata religion — The Samkhya and the Yoga — 
Indian commentaries on the Gita — The Gita ethics is based on meta- 
physics — The problem of reality — The real in the objective and the 
subjective worlds — Brahman and the world — Purusottama — Intuition 
and thought — Higher and lower prakrti — The avataras — The nature 
of the universe— Maya — Creation — The individual soul — Plurality of 
souls — Rebirth — The ethics of the Gita — Reason, will and emotion — 
Jnana marga— Science and philosophy — Patanjali’s Yoga — The Jfiani 
— Bhakti marga — The personality of God — The religious consciousness 
— Karma marga — The problem of morality — The moral standard — 
Disinterested action — Gurias — The Vedic theory of sacrifices — Caste — 
Is work compatible with moksa ? — The problem of human freedom 
— The integral life of spirit — Ultimate freedom and its character. 


I 

The Bhagavadgita 

The Bhagavadgita which forms part of the Bhisma parva 
of the Mah&bharata is the most popular religious poem of 
Sanskrit literature. It is said to be “ the most beautiful, 
perhaps the only true philosophical song existing in any known 
tongue.” 1 It is a book conveying lessons of philosophy, 
religion and ethics. It is not looked upon as a sruti, or a 
revealed scripture, but is regarded as a smrti, or a tradition. 
Yet if the hold which a work has on the mind of man is any 
clue to its importance, then the Gita is the most influential 
work in Indian thought. Its message of deliverance is simple. 
While only the rich could buy off the gods by their sacrifices. 


* William von Humboldt. 

619 



520 INDIAN PHILOSOPHY 

and only the cultured could pursue the way of knowledge, 
the Gita teaches a method which is within the reach of all, 
that of bhakti, or devotion to God. The poet makes the 
teacher the very God descended into humanity. He is 
supposed to address Arjuna, the representative man, at a 
great crisis in his life. Arjuna comes to the battle-field, 
convinced of therighteousness of his cause and prepared to 
fight the enemy. At the psychological moment he shrinks 
from his duty. His conscience is troubled, his heart is torn 
with anguish and his state of mind, “ like to a little kingdom, 
suffers then the nature of an insurrection.” If to slay is 
to sin, it is a worse sin to slay those to whom we owe love and 
worship. Arjuna typifies the struggling individual who feels 
the burden anti the mystery of the world. He has not yet 
built within himself a strong centre of spirit from which he 
can know not only the unreality of his own desires and passions, 
but also the true status of the world opposing him. The 
despondency of Arjuna is not the passing mood of a 
disappointed man, but is the feeling of a void, a sort of 
deadness felt in the heart, exciting a sense of the unreality 
of things. Arjuna is ready to repudiate his life if necessary. 
He does not, however, know what is right for him to do. 
He is faced by a terrible temptation and passes through an 
intense inward agony. His cry is a simple yet tremendous 
one, significant of the tragedy of man, which all who can see 
beyond the actual drama of the hour can recognise. The 
mood of despair in wdiich Arjuna is found in the first chapter 
of the Gita is what the mystics call the dark night of the soul, 
an essential step in the upward path. The further stages of 
illumination and realisation are found in the course of the 
dialogue. From the second chapter onwards we have a 
philosophical analysis. The essential thing in man is not the 
body or the senses, but the changeless spirit. The mind of 
Arjuna is switched on to a new path. The life of the soul 
is symbolised by the battle-field of Kuruksetra, and the 
Kauravas are the enemies v r ho impede the progress of the 
soul. Arjuna attempts to recapture the kingdom of man 
by resisting the temptations and controlling the passions. 
The path of progress is through suffering and self-abnegation. 
Arjuna tries to evade the rigorous ordeal by subtle arguments 



THE THEISM OF THE BHAGAVADGlTA 521 


and specious excuses. Krsna stands for the voice of 
God, delivering his message in thrilling notes, warning Arjuna 
against dejection of spirit. The opening chapter shows 
great insight into the heart of man, its conflict of motives, 
the force of selfishness and the subtle whisperings of the 
Evil One. As the dialogue proceeds the dramatic element 
disappears. The echoes of the battle-field die away, and we 
have only an interview between God and man. The chariot 
of war becomes the lonely cell of meditation, and a corner of 
the battle-field where the voices of the world are stilled, a fit 
place for thoughts on the supreme. 

The teacher is the favourite god of India, who is at once 
human and divine. He is the god of beauty and love, 
whom his devotees enthrone on the wings of birds, on the 
petals of flowers, on whatever they most delight in of all that 
lives on earth. The poet vividly imagines how an incarnate 
God would speak of Himself. There is support for the poet’s 
device to make Krsna say that he was Brahman. In the 
Vedanta Sutras , 1 the Vedic passage where Indra declares him- 
self to be Brahman is explained on the hypothesis that Indra 
is only referring to the philosophical truth that the Atman 
in man is one with the Supreme Brahman. When Indra 
says “ Worship me,” he means “ worship the God I worship.” 
On a similar principle Vamadeva’s declaration that he 
is Manu and Surya is explained. Besides, the Gita teaches 
that an individual freed from passion and fear and purified 
by the fire of wisdom attains to the state of God. Krsna 
of the Gita stands for the infinite in the finite, the God in 
man concealed within the folds of flesh and the powers of 
sense. 

The message of the Gita is universal in its scope. It 
is the philosophical basis of popular Hinduism. The author 
is a man of deep culture, catholic rather than critical. He does 
not lead a missionary movement ; he addresses no sect, estab- 
lishes no school, but opens the way to all the winds that blow. 
He sympathises with all forms of worship, and is therefore 
well fitted for the task of interpreting the spirit of Hinduism 
which is unwilling to break up culture into compartments 
and treat other forms of thought and practices in a spirit 

1 i. i. 3°- 



522 INDIAN PHILOSOPHY 

of negation. 1 The Gita appeals to us not only by its force 
of thought and majesty of vision, but also by its fervour of 
devotion and sweetness of spiritual emotion. Though the 
Gita did much to develop spiritual worship and undermine 
inhuman practices, still on account of its non-critical attitude 
3t did not destroy altogether false modes of worship. 

The tone of the Gita is dogmatic, and its author does not 
suspect that it is possible for him to err. He gives the 
truth as he sees it, and he seems to see it in its entirety 
and many-sidedness, and to believe in its saving power. 
“ In the Gita there is a sage that speaks in the fullness and 
enthusiasm of his knowledge and of his feelings, and not a 
philosopher brought up in any school who divides his material 
in conformity to a settled method and arrives at the last 
steps of his doctrines through the clue of a set of systematic 
ideas.” 2 The Gita stands midway between a philosophical 
system and a poetic inspiration. We do not have here the 
illimitable suggestiveness of the Upanisads, since it is a 
deliberately intellectual solution of the problem of life. It 
is designed to meet a situation complicated by troubles of 
conscience and confusion of mind. 

The main spirit of the Gita is that of the Upanisads ; 
only there is a greater emphasis on the religious side. The 
thin abstractions of the Upanisads could not satisfy the many- 
sided needs of the soul. The other attempts to solve the 
secret of life were more theistic in their texture. The author 
of the Gita found that men could not be made to love logic. 
So he took his stand on the Upanisads, drew out their 
religious implications, galvanised them into a living system 
by incorporating with them popular mythology and national 
imagination. 

II 

Date 

The question of the date of the Bhagavadglta cannot 
be easily settled. Since it forms a part of the Mahabharata, 
it is sometimes doubted whether it is an interpolation added 

1 B.G., iii. 29. 

1 Indian Antiquary, 1918, p. 3. Garbe’s Introduction to the Bhaga- 
vadglta. 



THE THEISM OF THE BHAGAVADGlTA 523 


to the text at a later period. According to Talboys Wheeler, 
that “ Ivrsna and Arjuna on the morning of the first day of 
the war, when both armies are drawn out in battle array and 
hostilities are about to begin,” should " enter into a long and 
philosophical dialogue respecting the various forms of devotion 
which lead to the emancipation of tho soul,” is unnatural. 
Telang, agreeing partially with this judgment, argues that the 
Bhagavadglta is an independent work appropriated by the 
author of the Mahabharata for his own purposes. 1 Though 
a philosophical discussion may be “ incongruous and irrele- 
vant ” at the beginning of the battle, still there is no doubt 
that only grave crises such as the battle-field stimulate in 
thinking minds thoughts about the ultimate values. Only 
then do spiritually disposed minds acquire the tension 
necessary to break the barricades of sense and touch the 
inner reality. It is possible that Arjuna might have had 
pointed advice from his friend Krsna which the poet worked 
up into the poem of seven hundred verses. The author of 
the Mahabharata is anxious to elaborate the principles of 
dharma whenever he has an opportunity, and he does so in 
the present context. 

There are internal references to the Bhagavadglta in the 
Mahabharata which clearly indicate that from the time of the 
composition of theMahabharata the Gita has been looked upon 
as a genuine part of it. 3 The stylistic resemblances between 
the Gita and the Mahabharata show that they belong to 
one whole.3 In the main views about other systems of 
philosophy and religion, there is also agreement. Karma 
is preferred to akarma.r The attitude to the Vedic sacrifices,5 
the statements of the order of creation, 6 the account of the 
Samkhya theory of gunas,7 and Patanjali's Yoga, 8 and the 
description of Visvarupa,9 are more or less the same. Nor 

1 S.B.E., vol. viii., Introduction, pp. 5-6. 

* Adi Parva, 2. 69 ; i. 179 ; 2. 247. 

3 Tilak: GIta-rahasya, Appendix; S.B.E., vol. viii.. Introduction. 

« B.G., chap, iii ; Vanaparva, chap, xxxii. 

5 Seintiparva, 267 ; see also Manu, chap. iii. 

6 B.G., chaps, vii and viii; Santiparva, 231. 

7 B.G., xiv and xv ; Asvamedhaparva, 36-39; Santiparva, 285 and 300-31 1. 

• B.G., chap, vi ; Santiparva, 239 and 300. 

9 Udyogaparva, 170; Asvamedhaparva, 55; Santiparva, 339; and 
Vfanaparva, 99. 



524 INDIAN PHILOSOPHY 

can we say that the principles of reconciliation are peculiar 
to the Gita. 

Even when we assign the Bhagavadgita to the Mahabha- 
rata as a genuine part of it, we cannot be sure of its date, since 
there are products of different periods included in it. Telang 
in a learned introduction to his Bhagavadgita deals with the 
general character of its teaching, its archaic style, its versifica 
tion and its internal references, and argues that the work 
belongs to a period earlier than the third century B.c. Sir 
R. G. Bhandarkar thinks that the Gita is at least as old as 
the fourth century B.c. Garbe assigns the original Gita to 
200 b.c., and the present form of it to a.d. 200. fSamkara 
(ninth century a.d.) comments on it, and Kalidasa knows it. 
In his Raghuvamsa 1 there is found a passage akin to a Gita 
verse. Bana refers to the Gita, and these two authors belong 
to the fifth and seventh century a.d. The Puranas (second 
century a.d.) contain many Gitas composed after the manner 
of the Bhagavadgita. Bhasa in his Karnabhara has a passage 
which reads like an echo 2 of a verse from the Gita. Bhasa 
is sometimes assigned to the second or the fourth century 
a.d., and sometimes to the second century B.c. Even on 
the former view, the Gita must have been earlier. Bodha- 
y ana’s Grhya Sutras are familiar with Vasudeva worship, 
and contain a statement attributed to the Lord (Bhagavan), 
which seems to be a quotation from the Bhagavadgita .3 This 
is also true of his Pitrmedha Sutras. If Apastamba belongs 
to the third century B.c. ,4 then Bodhayana is earlier by a 
century or two. We shall not, I believe, be far wrong if we 
assign the Gita to the fifth century B.c.5 

III 

Relation to Other Systems 

Almost all the views which prevailed in the age influenced 
the author of the Gita, who brings to a focus the rays of religious 

> 10. 31. Cf. B.G., 3. 22. 

> Hato pi labhate svargam jitva tu Iabhate yasah. Cf. B.G., ii. 37. 

3 2. 22. 9. Cf. B.G., ix. 26. 

< S B.E., vol. ii.. Introduction, p. xliii. Cf. vol. xiv., p. xliii. 

s If the references in the Dhaiim. Sutras are regarded as interpolated 
texts, then the Gita may be assigned to the third or I he second century B c. 



THE THEISM OF THE BHAGAVADGITA 525 


light cast at random in the world about him. It is necessary 
for us to note the exact relations between the Gita on the 
one hand and the Vedas, the Upanisads, Buddhism, the 
Bhagavata religion and the systems of Samkhya and Yoga 
on the other. 

The Gita does not throw overboard the authority of the 
Vedas. It considers the Vedic injunctions to be quite valid 
for men of a particular cultural status. One cannot attain 
perfection, according to the Gita, without obeying the 
ordinances of the Vedas. Sacrificial acts are required to be 
performed without any expectation of reward. 1 After a 
particular stage, the performance of Vedic rites tends to 
become an obstacle to the attainment of supreme perfection. 
The exalted character of the Vedic gods is not accepted. 
Though the Vedic obervances secure for us power and wealth, 
they do not take us straight to freedom. Deliverance can 
be found by the discovery of self. When the secret of salva- 
tion is in our possession there is no need for the performance 
of Vedic karmas. 2 * 4 * 

The philosophic background of the Gita is taken from 
the Upanisads. Some verses are common to the Upanisads 
and the Gita. 3 The discussions of Ksetra and Ksetrajna, 
Ksara and Aksara are based on the Upanisads. The 
account of the supreme reality is also derived from the same 
source. Bhakti is a direct development of the upasana of 
the Upanisads. The love for the supreme involves the giving 
up of all else. “ What shall we do with progeny, when we 
have got this being, this world to live in ? ” 4 Ideas of 
devotion to the supreme, the conquest of self and the attain- 
ment of a condition of peace and serenity are in the atmo- 
sphere of the period. Disinterested work is defended even in 
the Upanisads. 5 That non-attachment results from an 
elevated state of mind is brought out in the Upanisads. 6 
The practical and the religious tendencies of the Upani- 


1 xvii. 12. ! ii. 42-45; ix. 20-21. 

3 B.G., ii. 29, and KathaUp., ii. 7 ; B.G., ii. 20 ; viii. 11, and KathaUp.. 
ii. 19; ii. 15; B.G., iii. 42, and Katha Up., iii. 10; B.G., vi. 11 and Svet, 

Up., ii. 10 ; B.G., vi. 13, and Svet. Up., ii. 8. 

4 Brh. Up., iv. 4. 22. 3 Isa. Up. 

4 Chan. Up., iv. 14. 3 ; Brih., iv. 4, 23. 



526 


INDIAN PHILOSOPHY 


sads are so developed as not to supersede the teachings of 
earlier thinkers. The cold flawless perfection was no doubt 
a magnificent explanation of the world, but it was not quite 
suited to be a transforming power of life. The vogue of 
the Bhagavata religion inclined the author of the Gita to 
give a glow and a penetrating power to the absolute of the 
Upanisads. He made it into a personal Isvara, called by 
the different names of Siva, Visnu, etc. All the same, the 
author is aware that he is only revivifying a dead past and 
not propounding a new theory. “ This imperishable yoga 
I declared to Vivasvat, and he taught it to Manu, Manu 
to Iksvaku,” and this secret is now revealed to Arjuna by 
Krsna . 1 This passage indicates that the message of the 
Gita is the ancient wisdom taught by Vi£vamitra, the 
seer of Gayatri, and the rsi of the third cycle of the Rg-Veda 
and Rama, Krsna, Gautama Buddha, and other teachers of 
the Solar line. The full name of the Gita, as it is evident from 
the colophon at the end of each chapter, is the Upanisad 
of the name of the Bhagavadgita. The traditional account 
of the relation between the Gita and the Upanisads is con- 
tained in the passage now almost too familiar for quotation, 
that " the Upanisads are the cows, Krsna is the milker, Arjuna 
the calf, and the nectar-like Gita is the excellent milk.” 

The Bhagavata religion was the immediate stimulus to 
the synthesis of the Bhagavadgita. It is actually suggested 
that the teaching of the Gita is identical with the doctrine 
of the Bhagavatas. It is sometimes called the Harigitad 
There is no mention of Buddhism, though some of the views 
of the Gita are like those of Buddhism. Both protest against 
the absolute authority of the Vedas and attempt to relax 
the rigours of caste by basing it on a less untenable founda- 
tion. Both are the manifestations of the same spiritual 
upheaval which shook the ritualistic religion, though the Gita 
was the more conservative, and therefore less thorough- 
going protest. Buddha announced the golden mean, though 
his own teaching was not quite true to it. To prefer celibacy 
to marriage, fasting to feasting, is not to practise the golden 
mean. The Gita denounces the religious madness of the 
hermits and the spiritual suicide of saints who prefer darkness 
* iv. 1-3. « isantiparva, 349. 10. 



THE THEISM OF THE BHAGAVADGlTA 527 


to daylight and sorrow to joy. It is possible to attain salva- 
tion without resorting to the cult of narrowness and death. 
The word nirvana occurs in the Gita, 1 but this does not show 
any borrowing from Buddhism, since it is not peculiar to it. 
In the descriptions of the ideal man the Gita and Buddhism 
agree. 2 As a philosophy and religion; the Gita is more 
complete than Buddhism, which emphasises overmuch the 
negative side. The Gita adopts the ethical principles of 
Buddhism, while it by implication condemns the negative 
metaphysics of Buddhism as the root of all unbelief and 
error. It is more in continuity with the past, and therefore 
had a better fortune than Buddhism in India. 

According to Garbe, "the teachings of the Samkhya-Yoga 
constitute almost entirely the foundation of the philosophical 
observations of the Bhagavadgita. In comparison with them 
the Vedanta takes a second place. Samkhya and Yoga are 
often mentioned by name, while the Vedanta appears only 
once (Vedantakrt, xv. 15), and then in the sense of Upani- 
sad or treatise. Accordingly, when we think merely of the 
role which the philosophical systems play in the Gita as it 
has been handed down to us, and when we consider the 
irreconcilable contradictions between the Samkhya- Yoga and 
the Vedanta, which can only be done away with by carefully 
distinguishing between the old and the new, the Vedantic 
constituents of the Bhagavadgita prove not to belong to the 
original poem. Whether we investigate the Gita from the 
religious or the philosophical side, the same result is reached.” 
The terms Samkhya-Yoga when they occur in the Gita do 
not represent the classical schools of Samkhya and Yoga, 
but only the reflective and the meditative methods of gaining 
salvation .3 Besides, during the period of the Gita there was 
no clear-cut distinction between the Samkhya-Yoga on one 
side and the Vedanta on the other, which alone can justify 
Garbe’s interpretation. Fitz-Edward Hall is more correct 

• vi. 15. 

1 ii. 55-72 ; iv. 16-23 • v - 18-28 ; xii. 13-16. Cf. Dhammapada, 360- 
423; Suttanipata, Munisutta, i. 7 and 14. 

3 B.G., ii. 39 ; iii. 3 ; v. 4-5 ; xiii. 24. In xviii. 13 there is a reference 
to the philosophy of Samkhya. Madhva quotes a verse from Vyasa Smrti, 
where Samkhya means knowledge of spirit, atmatattvavij lanam. See his 
Commentary on B.G., ii. 40. 



528 


INDIAN PHILOSOPHY 


when he says : " In the Upanisads, the Bhagavadgita, and 
other ancient Hindu books, we encounter, in combination, the 
doctrines, which after having been subjected to modifications 
that rendered them as wholes irreconcilable, were dis- 
tinguished at an uncertain period into what have for many 
ages been styled the Samkhya and the Vedanta.” 1 The 
psychology and the order of the creation of the Samkhya are 
accepted by the Gita, though the metaphysical implications of 
the Samkhya are rejected by it. 1 Kapila’sname is mentioned, 
though not that of Patanjali. We cannot, however, be sure 
that this Kapila is the founder of the Samkhya system. 
Even if it be so, it does not follow that the system in all its 
details was elaborated by that time. The terms buddhi 
or understanding, ahamkara or self-sense, and manas or mind, 
occur, though not always in their Samkhya significations. 
The same is true of prakrti.3 While the Samkhya deliberately 
avoids the question of the existence of God, the Gita is most 
anxious to establish it. 

Though the distinction between puru§a and prakrti 
is recognised, the dualism is overcome. Purusa is not an 
independent element, but only a prakrti or form of God. 
The psychical intelligence is the higher nature. When we 
deal with the Samkhya system we shall see how it looks upon 
all the modes of prakrti or nature as phenomena implying 
a permanent subject to whom they appear and for whom 
they exist. Though prakrti or nature is unconscious, its 
activities are purposive, meant as they are for the freedom of 
the soul. The teleological character of its activities is not in 
accord with its alleged unconsciousness. In the Gita the 
difficulty is overcome. There is a spiritual fact behind the play 
of prakrti or nature. Purusa or soul is not the independent 
reality which it is in the Samkhya system. Its nature is not 
mere awareness, but bliss also. The Gita does not recognis* 
any ultimate distinctness of individual souls. 4 It also believes 
in the existence of an Uttamapurusa, or supreme soul. 
Yet the character of the individual soul and its relation to 

* Preface to Samkhyasara, p. 7. 

1 ii. 11-16, 1S-30 ; ii. 27-29; v. 14; rii. 4; xiii. 5. 

J lii. 33 ; iv. 6 ; vii. 4 ; ix. 8 ; xi. 51 ; xiii. 20 ; xviii. 59. 

« vii. 4 ; xiii. 20-22 ; see also V.S., 2. 1. 1., and S.B on it. 



THE THEISM OF THE BHAGAVADGITA 529 


nature as given in the Bhagavadgita show the influence of 
the Samkhya theory. 1 Purusa is the spectator, and not the 
actor. Prakrti does everything. He who thinks “ I act ” 
is mistaken. r To realise the separateness of purusa from 
prakrti, soul from nature, is the end of life. The theory of the 
gunas or qualities is accepted. “ There is no entity on earth 
or heaven among the devas that is free from the three qualities 
born of prakrti.” 2 The gunas constitute the triple cord 
of bondage. So long as we are subject to them we have 
to wander in the circuit of existence. Freedom is deliverance 
from the gunas. The physiological account of the internal 
organs and the senses is found here as in the Samkhya.3 
The Gita refers to yoga practices also. When Arjuna asks 
Krsna as to how mind, which is admittedly fickle and 
boisterous, can be brought under control, Krsna answers 
by saying that abhyasa, or practice, and vairagya, or in- 
difference to worldly objects, should be acquired. t 


IV 

The Teaching of the Gita 

At the time of the Gita many different views about ulti- 
mate reality and man’s destiny prevailed. There were the 
Upanisad traditions based on the intuition of the soul, the 
Samkhya doctrine that liberation can be obtained by freeing 
oneself from contact with nature, the Karma Mimamsa view 
that by fulfilling our duties we attain perfection, the way 
of devotional feeling which holds that by attaining exaltation 
of the heart, the gladness of freedom can be obtained, and the 
Yoga system, which declares that man is free when the quiet 
life of the soul takes the place of the vari-coloured light of 
the world. The supreme spirit is viewed either as an 
impersonal absolute or a personal lord. The Gita attempts 
to synthesise the heterogeneous elements and fuse them 
all into a single whole. That is why we find in it apparently 

■ Samkhya KarikS, 6a ; B.G., xiii. 34. 

‘ xviii. 40 ; xiv. 5. ! iii. 40-42 ; xiii. 5. 

4 See B.G., vi. 33-34. ^aihkara sees a reference to the Nyaya system 
in x. 32. Sco S.B.G. on it. 



530 INDIAN PHILOSOPHY 

conflicting views about the end of freedom and the means of 
discipline. Finding that the Gita is not a consistent piece 
of doctrine, different writers try to account for it in different 
ways. Garbe and Hopkins suppose that several writers in 
different centuries have been at work upon it. According 
to Garbe the original Gita was written in the second century 
b.c. as a theistic tract, based on the Samkhya-Yoga, though 
in the second century a.d. it was adapted by the upholders 
of the Upanisad monism. “ These two doctrines — the 
theistic and the pantheistic — are mixed up with each other, 
and follow each other, sometimes quite unconnected and some- 
times loosely connected. And it is not the case that the one 
is represented as a lower exoteric and the other as the higher 
esoteric doctrine. It is nowhere taught that theism is a 
preliminary step to the knowledge of the reality or that it is 
its symbol, and that the pantheism of the Vedanta is the 
ultimate reality itself ; but the two beliefs are treated of 
almost throughout as though there was indeed no difference 
between them, either verbal or real.” 1 Hopkins makes the 
Gita a Krsnaite version of a Visnuite poem, which was 
itself a late Upanisad. Keith believes that it was orignally 
an Upanisad of the type of the Svetasvatara, but was later 
adapted to the cult of Krsna. Holtzmann looks upon it 
as a Visnuite remodelling of a pantheistic poem. Barnett 
thinks that different streams of tradition became confused in 
the mind of the author. Deussen makes it a late product of 
the degeneration of the monistic thought of the Upanisads, 
belonging to a period of transition from theism to realistic 
atheism. 

There is no need to accept any of these conjectures. The 
Gita is an application of the Upanisad ideal to the new situa- 
tions which arose at the time of the Mahabliarata. In adapting 
the idealism of the Upanisads to a theistically minded people, 
it attempts to derive a religion from the Upanisad philosophy. 
It shows that the reflective spiritual idealism of the Upani- 
sads has room for the living warm religion of personal 
devotion. The absolute of the Upanisads is revealed as 
the fulfilment of the reflective and the emotional demands of 
human nature. This change of emphasis from the speculative 
* I.A., December 1918. 



THE THEISM OF THE BHAGAVADG1TA 531 


to the practical, from the philosophical to the religious, is 
also to be found in the later Upanisads, where we have the 
saviour responding to the cry of faith. The Gita attempts 
a spiritual synthesis which could support life and conduct 
on the basis of the Upanisad truth, which it carries into 
the life-blood of the Indian people. 

The question whether the Gita succeeds in gathering up 
the different tendencies of thought into a true whole remains 
to be answered in the course of our study. The Indian 
tradition has always felt that incongruous elements are 
fused together in it, while the Western scholar has per- 
sisted that the brilliant fragments refuse to coalesce even 
in the skilled hands of the author. There is no use of dogma- 
tising in the very premises of the discussion . 1 


1 There are several commentaries on the Gita by Indian writers, of 
which the chief are those by Vrttikara, £arhkara, Ramanuja, Madhva, 
Vallabha, Nimbarka and Jnanesvar. Anandagiri says that the Vrttikara 
Bodhayana, the author of a voluminous commentary on the Vedanta 
Sutras, also wrote a vrtti or gloss on the Gita (see Anandagiri on S.B.G., 
ii. io). According to him the Gita teaches the method of the combined 
pursuit of J liana and Karma. Neither of them by itself leads to freedom. 
Saihkara believes that Juana or wisdom is the highest means to perfection, 
and contends that the identity of the individual soul with the supreme 
Brahman is to be realised by intuitional wisdom. The manyness of the world 
is traced to the imperfection of man. All action is the cause of bondage, since 
it is dependent on the false sense of duality. When true wisdom abolishes our 
ideas of duality, the soul is saved, and no action has any meaning thereafter. 
The other paths of Karma or work, Bhalcti or devotion. Yoga or self-control, 
lead only to wisdom or Jnana. See S.B.G., iii. i. Ramanuja distinguishes 
jlva or cit, world or acit, and God or Isvara, and makes the two former 
constitute the body of God. In metaphysics he adopts thus a modified 
monism, and in practice insists on the path of devotion. He suggests by 
implication that the rules of caste should be maintained throughout. Both 
Samkara and Ramanuja subordinate Karma, though with different motives. 
Madhva repudiates the theory' of maya and accepts an ultimate distinction 
between the absolute Brahman and the individual souls. For him, also, 
devotion to God is the supreme way to bliss. Though Vallabha declares 
that Brahman and the purified soul are one, he yet makes jlva a part of 
Brahman. The world of maya is not false, since maya is only a power 
separated from Isvara by his will. Grace of God is the only way by which 
the individual could be freed. According to Nimbarka the world and the 
souls are dependent on God in whom they exist, though in a subtle con- 
dition. His theory is called dualistic non-dualism. Jnanesvar makes 
Patahjali's yoga the aim of the teaching of the Gita. When there are so 
many views of the Gita adopted by able minds, the task of the student is 
not an easy one. Its bold and brilliant syntheses and reconciliations do 
not always give us exact information as to how contradictory ideas are to 



532 INDIAN PHILOSOPHY 

The context in which the Gita is said to be delivered 
points out how its central purpose is to solve the problem of 
life and stimulate right conduct. It is obviously an ethical 
treatise, a yoga sastra. The Gita was formulated in a period 
of ethical religion and so shared in the feeling of the age. 
Whatever peculiar adaptations the term yoga may have in 
the Gita, it throughout keeps up its practical reference . 1 
Yoga is getting to God, relating oneself to the power that 
rules the universe, touching the absolute. It is yoking not 
merely this or that power of the soul, but all the forces of 
heart, mind and will to God. It is the effort of man to unite 
himself to the deeper principle. We have to change the 
whole poise of the soul into something absolute and un- 
compromising and develop the strength to resist power and 
pleasure. Yoga thus comes to mean the discipline by which 
we can train ourselves to bear the shocks of the world with 
the central being of our soul untouched. It is the method or 
the instrument, upaya, by which the end can be gained. 
Patanjali’s yoga is a system of psychic discipline by which we 
can clear the intellect, free the mind of its illusions and get 
a direct perception of reality. We can discipline the emotions 
and realise the supreme by a soul-surrender to God. We can 
train our will so as to make our whole life one continuous 
divine service. We can also perceive the divine in the nature 
of our being, watch it with ardent love and aspiration, till 
the spark grows into an infinite light. All these are different 
yogas or methods leading to the one supreme yoga or union 
with God. But no ethical message can be sustained if it is 
not backed up by a metaphysical statement. So the yoga 
sastra of the Gita is rooted in brahmavidya, or knowledge of 
the spirit. The Gita is a system of speculation as well as a rule 

be logically combined. There is no denying that the Gita fosters a life of 
spirit. There is a romantic twilight which captures the imagination and 
uplifts our nature, so long as we are religiously minded and rely on dogmatic 
thought. But the critical intellect has to work on it with care before it 
can deduce a consistent system from it. 

‘ Yoga is practice as distinct from Samkhya or knowledge. See Sveta- 
Svatara Upanisad, *' Saiiikhyayogadigamyam,” knowable by knowledge 
and practice. Yoga also means karma, see Gita, iii. 7; v. 1. 2; ix. 28; 
xiii. 24. The yoga of the Lord is spoken of as His wondrous power. See 
ix. 5 ; x. 7 ; xi. 8. Yoga also means getting things which we do not have. 
See ix. 22. 



THE THEISM OF THE BHAGAVADGlTA 533 


of life, an intellectual search for truth as well as an attempt 
to make the truth dynamic in the soul of man. This is 
evident from the colophon at the end of each chapter, which 
has come down to us from a date which is unknown, that it 
is the yoga sastra, or religious discipline of the philosophy 
of Brahman, " brahmavidyanam yogasastre.” 

V 

Ultimate Reality 

The problem of ultimate reality is here approached, as in 
the Upanisads, by the two ways of an analysis of the objective 
and of the subjective. The metaphysical bent of the author 
is clearly revealed in the second chapter, where he gives us 
the principle on which his scheme is based : “ Of the unreal 
there is no being, and of the real there is no non-being.” 1 
The objective analysis proceeds on the basis of a distinction 
between substance and shadow, the immortal and the 
perishable, the aksara and the ksara. “ There are these 
two beings in the world, the destructible ksara and the 
indestructible aksara. The unchanging one is the aksara.” 2 
We cannot say that the “ unchanging one ” here referred to 
is the supreme reality, for in the very next verse the Gita 
declares that “ the supreme being is another called the highest 
self, Paramatman, who as the inexhaustible Lord pervading 
the three worlds supports them.” 3 The author first 
distinguishes the permanent background of the world from 
its transitory manifestations, the prakrti from its changes. 
Within this world of experience, “ imau loke,” we have 
the perishable and the permanent aspects. Though prakrti 
is permanent when compared with the changes of the world, 
still it is not absolutely real, since it depends on the supreme 
Lord. i This supreme spirit is the true immortal, the abode 
of the eternal. 5 Ramanuja, to suit his own special theory, 
makes ksara stand for the principle of prakrti, and aksara 

1 ii. 16. » xv. 16. 3 xv. 17. 

< It is said that " there is another being unmanifested and eternal and 
distinct from this unmanifested principle, which is not destroyed when all 
existences are destroyed ’’ (viii. 20). 



534 INDIAN PHILOSOPHY 

for the individual soul, and regards Purusottama, or the 
supreme self, as superior to both these. It is possible for us 
to interpret the conception of Purusottama as that of the 
concrete personality which is superior to the false abstractions 
of the infinite and the finite. The only difficulty is that 
Brahman, declared to be the basis of the finite, cannot be 
looked upon as a mere abstraction. The Gita distinguishes 
between the finite or the impermanent, and the infinite or 
the permanent. Whatever is limited or transitory is not 
leal. All becoming is an untenable contradiction. That 
which becomes is not being. If it were being, it would 
not become. Since the things of the world are struggling 
to become something else, they are not real. Transitoriness 
marks all things on earth. In the background of our 
consciousness, there is the conviction that there is something 
that does not pass away. For nothing can come out of 
nothing. That ultimate being of reality is not the ever- 
changing prakrti. It is the supreme Brahman. It is the 
eternal or rock-seated being, kutasthasatta, while the world is 
only timeless, endless existence, anadipravdhasatld. “ He 
sees truly who sees the supreme Lord abiding alike in 
all entities and not destroyed though they are destroyed .” 1 
This eternal spirit dwells in all beings, and is therefore not 
a qualitatively distinct other to the finite. The Gita believes 
in the reality of an infinite being underlying and animating 
all finite existences. 

The individual self is ever unsatisfied with itself and is 
struggling always to become something else. In its conscious- 
ness of limitation, there is a sense of the infinite. The finite 
self which is limited, which ever tries to rise beyond its sad 
plight, is not ultimately real. The true self has the character 
of imperishableness. The Gita tries to find out the element 
of permanence in the self, that which is always the subject and 
never the object. Ksetra is the place or the object, and 
Ksetrajna is the knower of the object or the subject . 2 
What is known is not a property of the knower. In the self 
of man, there is the element of the knower that remains 
constant behind all changes. It is the eternal, immutable, 
timeless self-existence. Breaking up the individual self into 

* xiii. 27 , see also viii. 20. ■ xiii. 1 and 5-6. 



THE THEISM OF THE BHAGAVADGITA 585 


its component parts of body, mind, soul, the Gita tries to 
discover the element which is always. The body is not the 
permanent subject, for it has an end, being only a fleeting 
frame. 1 The sense life is brief and mutable. 3 The empirical 
mind is ever changing. All these are only objects for a subject, 
the instruments through which the soul works. They have 
no existence in their own right. The inner principle, the 
source of all knowledge, is in the words of the Gita, “greater 
than the senses, the mind and the understanding.” 3 It is 
the element which combines and is present throughout even 
in deep sleep. This function of combination cannot be 
attributed to the senses or the understanding or a combination 
of these. 4 The principle of the subject is the indispensable 
basis on which the object world, including the empirical self, 
is based. If we drop the subject, the object vanishes. But 
the subject does not vanish even though the object disappears. 
The Gita gives eloquent descriptions of this undying element. 
It is the lord of the body. “ He is not born nor does He die, 
nor having been, does He cease to be any more. Unborn, 
eternal, everlasting, ancient, He is not slain when the body 
is destroyed.” 5 “ Weapons do not reach it, flame does not 

burn it nor water wet it. Wind does not dry it. It is 
impenetrable, uncombustible . . . perpetual, all pervading, 
stable, immovable, ancient.” 6 

About the nature of the supreme self, the Gita account 
is rather puzzling. “ This inexhaustible supreme self, 
being without beginning and without qualities, does not act 
and is not tainted, though stationed in the body.” 7 It 
is viewed as a mere spectator. The self is akartr, non-doer. 
The whole drama of evolution belongs to the object world. 
Intelligence, mind, senses are looked upon as the develop- 
ments of the unconscious prakrti, which is able to bring 
about this ascent on account of the presence of spirit. The 
subject self is within us calm and equal, uncaught in the 
external world, though its support, source and immanent 
witness. 

We have in the actual individuals of the world combina- 
tions of subject and object. 8 The empirical individuals are 

1 ii. 13. 11. iS. * ii. 14. 3 iii. 42 < xiii. 6. 

• 11. 20 . * ii. 22-25. ? xiii. 31. 1 xm. 27. 



536 INDIAN PHILOSOPHY 

the divine principle of subject limited by contexts of object. 
In the world the subject and the object are always found 
together. 1 Only the obj ect has not an ultimate transcendental 
existence. The subject superior to the object is the basis 
of the object. “ When a man sees all the variety of existence 
as rooted in one and all as emanating from that, he becomes 
one with the supreme.” 2 When the confusion with the object 
terminates, the subject in all is found to be the same. When 
Krsna urges Arjuna not to grieve for the dead, he says that 
death is not extinction. The individual form may change, 
but the essence is not destroyed. Until perfection is obtained, 
individuality persists. However repeatedly the mortal 
frame is destroyed, the inner individuality preserves its 
identity and takes on a new form. Buoyed up by this faith, 
man has to work for self-knowledge. Our imperishableness 
is guaranteed either by way of endlessness or perfection. 
It is the unfolding of our implicit infinitude. It is by this 
affirmation of the soul, by this vindication of the intuition 
of the Upanisads, that the Atman, or the pure subject, 
remains unaffected, even though our body be “ dust returning 
unto dust,” that Krsna stills the unrest of Arjuna's mind. 

Never the spirit was born ; the spirit shall cease to be never. 
Never was time it was not ; end and beginning are dreams ; 
Birthless and deathless and changeless remaineth the spirit for ever, 
Death hath not touched it at all, dead though the house of it seems.* 

In the spirit of the Upanisads the Gita identifies the two 
principles of the Atman and the Brahman. Behind the 
fleeting senses and the body there is the Atman ; behind the 
fleeting objects of the world there is Brahman. The two 
are one, being of identical nature. The reality of this is 
a matter of each man’s experience to be realised for himself. 
Any endeavour to define the unchanging in terms of the 
changing fails. There is, however, no attempt in the Gita 
to prove that the absolute discerned by intuition is the 
logical foundation of the world, though this is implied. If 
the world is to be an experience and not a chaotic confusion, 
then we require the reality of an unconditioned absolute. 

» xiii. 20-21. » xiii. 31. 

I Sir Edwin Arnold's translation. 



THE THEISM OF THE BHAGAVADGlTA 537 


We should, however, be very careful not to oppose the 
infinite and the finite as two mutually exclusive spheres. 
This will lead us to a false view of the infinite. What strikes 
us at first is the distinction between the passing finite and the 
real infinite. But if this were all, then the infinite becomes 
finitised, converted into something limited, since the opposed 
and the excluded finite becomes the limit of the infinite. 
It is wrong to conceive the infinite as something pushed 
out of the being of the finite. It is the finite itself in its 
truth. It is the infinitised finite, the real in the finite, and 
not something lying side by side with it. If we overlook the 
infinite in the finite, we get an endless progress peculiar to 
the world of finitude or samsara. This very endlessness is 
the sign of the infinite within the sphere of the finite. The 
finite reveals itself as nothing more than the infinite made 
finite. The distinction between the infinite and the finite 
is only a characteristic of loose thinking. In truth there is 
only the infinite, and the finite is nothing more than the 
finitisation of the infinite. It follows that terms like 
transcendence and immanence are inapplicable, since these 
assume a distinct “ other ” to the absolute. Any category 
of thought is inadequate for the purposes of the absolute. 
It is described as neither being nor non-being, neither formed 
nor unformed . 1 The Gita reiterates the Upanisad principle 
that the real is the immutable self-existence behind the 
cosmic world, with its space, time and causality. 

The Gita asserts the truth of an advaita or non-dualism 
in philosophy. The supreme Brahman is the immutable self- 
existence “of which the Vedantins speak, to which the doers 
of the austerities attain. ” It is the highest status and supreme 
goal of the soul’s movement in time, though it is itself no 
movement, but a status original, eternal and supreme. In 
the unalterable eternity of Brahman, all that moves and 
evolves is founded. By it they exist ; they cannot be without 
't, though it causes nothing, does nothing and determines 
nothing. The two, Brahman and the world, seem to be 
opposed in features. Even though we repudiate the reality 
of samsara and look upon it as a mere shadow, still there is 
the substance of which it is the shadow. The world of 


5 xiii. 12. 



538 INDIAN PHILOSOPHY 

samsara shows its unreality by its constant struggle to over- 
reach itself, but the absolute Brahman is its own end, and 
looks to no end beyond itself. Since the world of samsara 
is based on the absolute, the latter is sometimes said to be 
both the changeless and the changing. The endless details 
and the oppositions of the samsara are there just to turn the 
mind in the direction where all oppositions are overcome and 
successions are embraced in a successionless consciousness. 
While all possible relatives and opposites are only based on 
it, it is not opposed to them, being their very substratum. 
We do not know how exactly the world of samsara is based 
on the absolute Brahman, though we are sure that without 
the absolute there would be no samsara. There is the silent 
sleeper as well as the seething sea. We do not know how 
exactly the two are related. We conceal our ignorance by 
the use of the word maya. The two are one, yet they seem 
different, and the seeming is due to maya. The transcendental 
reality, though untouched by the changes, still determines 
them. From the philosophical point of view we are obliged 
to stop here. “ Who could perceive directly and who 
could declare whence born or why this variegated 
creation ? ” 1 

The same problem when applied to the individual self 
becomes one of the relation of the free subject to the object. 
The bond between the immortal witness self and the flowing 
changes of consciousness, we do not know. Samkara in 
this difficulty adopts the hypothesis of adhyasa or super- 
position. The two, subject and object, cannot be related by 
way of samyoga or contact, since the subject is partless. 
The relation cannot be samavaya, or inseparable inherence, 
since the two are not related as cause and effect. Samkara con- 
cludes, “ that it must be of the nature of mutual adhyasa, 
i.e. it consists in confounding them as well as their attributes 
with each other, owing to the absence of a discrimination 
between the nature of object and that of subject, like the 
union of mother-of-pearl and silver or of rope and snake when 
they are mistaken the one for the other owing to the absence 
of discrimination. The union of the two is itself apparent, 
mithyajnana, and it vanishes when a man attains to right 

1 Taittiriya Brahmana, ii. 8-9. 



THE THEISM OF THE BHAGAVADGlTA 539 


knowledge.” 1 This theory is not found in the Gita, however 
much it may be implied by it. 

The metaphysical idealism of the Upanisads is trans- 
formed in the Gita into a theistic religion, providing room 
for love, faith, prayer and devotion. So long as we do 
not have the vision of the absolute, but are working from the 
side of the empirical world, we can account for it only on 
the theory of the supreme godhead of Purusottama. The 
impersonality of the absolute is not its whole significance for 
man. The Gita, anxious to adapt the Upanisad idealism 
to the daily life of mankind, supports a divine activity and 
participation in nature. It tries to give us a God who satisfies 
the whole being of man, a real which exceeds the mere infinite 
and the mere finite. The supreme soul is the origin and cause 
of the world, the indivisible energy pervading all life. Moral 
attributes are combined with the metaphysical . 2 The Gita 
refuses to commit the fallacy of taking distinctions for 
divisions. It reconciles all abstract oppositions. Thought 
cannot act without creating distinctions and reconciling them. 
The moment we think the absolute, we have to translate 
the truth of intuition into terms of thought. Pure ‘‘being ” 
is gone over into " nothing,” and we have left in our hands 
a unity of being and nothing. This unity is as real as thought 
itself. Of course the Gita does not tell us of the way in which 
the absolute as impersonal non-active spirit becomes the 
active personal Lord creating and sustaining the universe. 
The problem is considered to be intellectually insoluble. The 
mystery clears up only when we rise to the level of intuition. 
The transformation of the absolute into God is maya or a 
mystery. It is also maya in the sense that the transformed 
world is not so real as the absolute itself. 

If through logic we try to understand the relation of the 
absolute to the world we assign to it a power or £akti. The 
inactive qualityless absolute, unrelated to any object, is con- 
verted by logic into the active personal Lord possessing 
power related to prakrti or nature. We have " Narayana 
brooding over the waters,” the eternal “ I ” confronting the 
pseudo-eternal “ not I.” This latter is also called prakrti 
or nature, since it generates the world. It is the source of 
* S.B.G., xiii. 26. ’ B.G., viii. 9 and 13. 

VOL. I 


18 



540 INDIAN PHILOSOPHY 

delusion, since it hides the true nature of reality from mortal 
vision. The world is organically connected with the Puru- 
sottama. All things partake of the duality of being and 
non-being from Purusottama downwards. The element 
of negation is introduced into the absolute, and the unity 
is forced to unfold its inwardness in the process of becoming. 
The “ ancient urge to action ” is located in the heart of 
Purusottama. The original unity is pregnant with the 
whole course of the world, which contains the past, the present 
and the future in a supreme now. Krsna shows to Arjuna 
the whole vi^varupa (worldform) in one vast shape . 1 In the 
radiance of eternity Arjuna sees nameless things, the form 
of Krsna bursting the very bounds of existence, filling the 
whole sky and the universe, worlds coursing through him 
like cataracts. Contradiction constitutes the main spring 
of progress. Even God has the element of negativity 
or maya, though He controls it. The supreme God puts 
forth His active nature or svamprakrtim and creates the 
jivas, who work out their destinies along lines determined by 
their own nature. While all this is done by the supreme 
through his native power exercised in the perishable world, 
he has another aspect untouched by it all. He is the im- 
personal absolute as well as the immanent will. He is the 
causeless cause, the unmoved mover. 

He is within all beings — and without — 

Motionless, yet still moving ; not discerned 
For subtlety of instant presence ; close 
To all, to each ; yet measurelessly far ; 

Not manifold, and yet subsisting still 
In all which lives. 

The light of lights, he is in the heart of the dark 
Shining eternally.’ 

The supreme is said to be possessed of two natures higher, 
para, and lower, apara, answering to the conscious and 
the unconscious aspects of the universe. The lower prakrti 
produces effects and modifications in the world of nature or 
of causes ; the higher prakrti gives rise to the purusas, or 
the intelligent souls, in the world of ends or values. The two 

1 B.G., chap, xi ; vi. 29 ; vii. 8-9 ; viii. 22 ; x. 

* xiii. 15-18. Sir Edwin Arnold’s translation. 



’ THE THEISM OF THE BHAGAVADGITA 541 


belong to one spiritual whole. Madhva cites a verse to this 
effect : “ There are two prakrtis for God, jada, or unconscious, 
and ajada, or conscious; the former is unmanifested prakrti ; 
the latter is Sri or Laksmi, which upholds the former. She 
is the consort of Narayana. With these two Hari creates the 
world.” 1 * 3 4 The Gita accepts the Samkhya theory of the evolu- 
tion of the manifold from the homogeneous indeterminate 
matter, determined by the presence of spirit or purusa. 
Only the presence of purusa necessary to stimulate prakrti 
to activity must be a real presence. It is therefore more 
correct to say that all activity is due to the combined effort 
of purusa and prakrti, though the element of intelligence 
is more prominent in the subjective and that of matter in the 
objective world. Both of them form the nature of the one 
Supreme. They are the constitutive stuff of the world.* 
That is why the Lord is said to be the support of the world 
as wall as the all-illumining light of consciousness. The author 
of the Gita does not describe the way in which the one nature 
of God manifests itself at one stage as unconscious matter, 
at another as conscious intelligence, and how these two 
products of one primal source appear to be antagonistic to 
each other during the course of the world progress. 3 

While dwelling in man and nature the Supreme is greater 
than both. The boundless universe in an endless space and 
time rests in Him and not He in it. The expression of God 
may change, but in Him is an element which is self-identical, 
the permanently fixed background for the phenomenal altera- 
tions. The diversified existence does not affect His identity. 4 


1 Commentary on vii. 5. 

* Ramanuja says : “ From the connexion between the unintelligent 
prakrti and the intelligent embryo cast into it (14. 3) there results the 
origin of all beings, which beginning from the gods and ending with im- 
movable things are all mixed up with the non-intelligent thing.” (R.B.G., 
13. 2.) Ramanuja, however, holds that these beings possess an ultimate 
existence distinct from that of Isvara, though the Gita is definite that 
the undivided Brahman is not really divided, but only seems to be so 
(vibhaktam iva, 13. 16). 

3 We are not, therefore, in a position to institute any comparison between 
the Gita conception of the Purusottama, or the whole, and Bergson’s theory 
of an eternal duree, or of the Gita doctrine of puru?a and prakrti with 
Bergson's conception of life and matter. 

4 M.B., 5 antiparva, 339-344. 



542 INDIAN PHILOSOPHY 

“As the mighty air everywhere moving is rooted in space so 
all things are in Me.” 1 Yet space is space even without the 
“ moving airs.” The Lord is not tainted by the qualities 
of creation. The world as the expression of His nature does 
not detract from the self-sufficiency of God. Yet we cannot 
know the nature of God apart from the constitution of the 
world. If the identical principle is emptied of all content, 
of all that constitutes progress in knowledge and life, the God- 
in-Itself may become unknowable. It is also true that if 
we lose ourselves in the world, the reality may be hidden from 
our vision. It is necessary for us to know what God is 
independent of all relations to objects, and how He maintains 
Himself throughout all changes He brings about. Simply 
because relatedness to objects cannot be excluded, we need 
not think that the subject has no self-identity. If the 
expression is confused with the spirit, the Gita theory will 
become one of cosmotheism. The author of the Gita, however, 
explicitly repudiates such suggestions. The whole world 
is said to be sustained by one part of God, “ ekariAena.” 2 
In the tenth chapter Krsna declares that He is manifesting 
only a portion of His endless glory. The immutability of 
the absolute and the activity of the Hvara are both taken 
over in the conception of Purusottama. 

The personal Purusottama is from the religious point of 
view higher than the immutable self-existence untouched by 
the subjective and the objective appearances of the universe. 
Pie is looked upon as an impartial governor ever ready to 
help those in distress. Simply because He sometimes inflicts, 
punishments we cannot call Him unjust or unkind. Srldhara 
quotes a verse which reads: “ Even as a mother is not 
unkind to her child whether she fondles or beats him, so also 
ISvara, the determiner of good and evil, is not unkind.” 3 
The impersonal absolute is envisaged as Purusottama for the 
purposes of religion. The idea of Purusottama is not a 
wilful self-deception accepted by the weak heart of man. 
While the dry light of reason gives us a featureless reality, 
spiritual intuition reveals to us a God who is both 
personal and impersonal. The principle of reconciliation 


1 ix. 6; ix. 10. * x. 42. 

5 Commentary on the Gita, iv. 8. 



THE THEISM OF THE BHAGAVADGlTA 543 


is contained in the Upanisads. The Isa Upanisad looks 
upon the real as both the mobile and the immobile. To dwell 
on either exclusively results in a darkness of knowledge or 
of ignorance. The Gita tries to make a synthesis of the 
imperishable self and the changing experience. The supreme 
spiritual being with energy is Purusottama ; the same in 
a state of eternal rest is Brahman. Samkarananda quotes 
a verse which says : “ There are two forms of Vasudeva, the 
manifested and the unmanifested ; the Parabrahman is 
the unmanifested, and the whole world of moving and un- 
moving things is the manifested.” 1 The Supreme has two 
aspects of the manifested and the unmanifested ; the former 
is emphasised when prakrti is assigned to its nature and 
Jiva is said to be a part of it. 1 The stress is on the same side 
when Krsna says : " Whatever is glorious, good, beautiful 
and mighty, understand that it all proceeds from a fragment 
of my splendour.” 3 When Krsna calls upon us to become 
his devotees, when he shows the viivarupa, or the world- 
form, whenever he uses the first person, we have references 
to the manifested aspect of the Supreme. 4 This side of divine 
nature is involved in the work of creation, where it loses 
itself in the succession of time and the waves of becoming. 
Beyond it all is another status, the silent and the immutable, 
than which there is nothing higher. The two together form 
the Purusottama. If we try to make out that the personal 
Lord is the highest metaphysical reality we get into trouble. 
“ I will declare that in the object of knowledge, knowing which 
one reaches immortality, the highest Brahman, having no 
beginning or end, which cannot be said to be existent or 
non-existent.” 5 The author of the Gita frequently reminds 
us that the manifested aspect is a creation of his own mystic 
power, or yoga maya. 6 “ The undiscerning ones, not knowing 
my transcendental and inexhaustible essence, than which 
there is nothing higher, think me, who am unperceived, to 
have become perceptible.” 7 On ultimate analysis the 
assumption of the form of Purusottama by the absolute 


1 Commentary on the Gita, iv. u. 
1 xv. 7. 

r ix. 34 ; xiv. 27 ; xviii 65. 

‘ vii. 25. 


J x. 41. 

5 R.B.G., xiii. u. 
T vii. 24. 



544 INDIAN PHILOSOPHY 

becomes less than real. It is therefore wrong to argue that 
according to the Gita the impersonal self is lower in reality 
than the personal Dvara, though it is true that the Gita 
considers the conception of a personal God to be more useful 
for religious purposes. 

Before we pass on to the cosmology of the Gita, we may 
note the relation between the conception of Purusottama 
and Krsna, thus raising the question of the avatars or 
incarnations. 

Whether Krsna is identical with Purusottama or only 
a limited manifestation of Him is a question on which there 
is difference of opinion. The theory of avatars is mentioned 
in the Gita. “ Even though I am unborn and inexhaustible 
in my essence, even though I am Lord of all beings, still 
assuming control over my own prakrti, I am born by means 
of my maya.” 1 The avatars are generally limited mani- 
festations of the Supreme, though the Bhagavata makes 
an exception in favour of Krsna, and makes him a full 
manifestation, “ Krsnas tu bhagavan svayam.” The form 
given to him is indicative of his all-comprehensiveness. The 
peacock feathers of his head are the variegated colours which 
flood man’s eyes. The colour of his complexion is that of 
the sky, the garland of wild flowers typifies the grandeur 
of the solar and the stellar systems. The flute he plays 
upon is that by which he gives forth his message. The yellow 
garment with which he decks his person is the halo of light 
which pervades space, the mark on his chest is the emblem 
of the devotion of the devotee which he proudly wears out 
of love to man. He stands in the devotee’s heart, and so 
great is his grace to man that his feet, which symbolise it, 
are put one over the other so that they may have their full 
effect. Samkara and Anandagiri look upon Krsna as only 
a partial manifestation of the supreme godhead . 2 Krsna, 
in the opinion of the author of the Gita, is the Purusottama. 
“ The foolish mistake me, clad in human form, ignorant of 
my supreme nature, the great Lord of all beings.” J 

« iv. 6. 

* Amsena sambabhflva, or born of a part. Samkara. Anandagiri, com- 
menting on it, says that it is an illusory form created by his own will. 
Svecchaniimitena mSyimayena avarflpeva. » ix. n. 



THE THEISM OF THE BHAGAVADGITA 545 

The theory of avatars brings to mankind a new spiritual 
message. The avatars are the militant gods struggling against 
sin and evil, death and destruction. “ Whensoever righteous- 
ness languishes and unrighteousness is on the ascendant, 
I create myself. I am born age after age, for the protection 
of the good, for the destruction of the evildoers and the 
establishment of the law.” 1 It is an eloquent expression of 
the law of the spiritual world. If God is looked upon as the 
saviour of man, He must manifest Himself whenever the 
forces of evil threaten to destroy human values. According 
to Hindu mythology, whenever the forces of vice and wicked- 
ness, a Ravana or a Kamsa are in the ascendant, the repre- 
sentatives of the moral order, Indra, Brahma, etc., along with 
Earth, which is said to suffer most, go to the court of Heaven 
and cry aloud for a world redeemer. The work of redemption, 
however, is a constant activity, though on occasions it 
becomes accentuated. The normal self-manifestation of 
God becomes emphatic when the world-order grows dis- 
proportionately evil. An avatar is a descent of God into 
man, and not an ascent of man into God. Though every 
conscious being is such a descent, it is only a veiled manifesta 
tion. There is a distinction between the self-conscious being 
of the divine and the same shrouded in ignorance. The human 
being is as good as an avatar, provided he crosses the maya 
of the world and transcends his imperfection. The creator 
Purusottama is not separated from his creatures. The two 
do not exist apart. He is always fulfilling himself in the 
world. Man comes to full consciousness by actualising his 
potentiality. It becomes indifferent, then, whether we say God 
limits Himself in the form of man or man rises to God work- 
ing through his nature. Yet an avatar generally means a 
God who limits Himself for some purpose on earth, and 
possesses even in His limited form the fullness of 
knowledge. 

The philosophical intellect tries to relate the avatars, 
or the ideals of perfection, to the great onward march of the 
world. The superior souls who focussed representative 
ages in their own selves became the embodiments of God 
in a special sense. These examples of men who established 

1 iv. See also Tevijja Sutta ; Mahanirvaija Tantra, iv. 



546 


INDIAN PHILOSOPHY 


supremacy over their nature and made their outward sub- 
stance reveal the God within are more effective for struggling 
individuals. From them can man take courage and try to 
grow into their stature. They are the moulds into which the 
seeking soul tries to cast itself, that it might grow towards 
God. What has been achieved by one man, a Christ or a 
Buddha, may be repeated in the lives of other men. The 
struggle towards the sanctifying of the earth or the revealing 
of the God-ideal has passed through several stages in the 
evolution on earth. The ten avatars of Visnu mark out 
the central steps. The growth in the sub-human or the 
animal level is emphasised in those of the fish, the tortoise 
and the boar. Next we have the transition between the animal 
and the human worlds in the man-lion. The development 
is not completely fulfilled when we come to the dwarf. The 
first stage of man is that of the brutish, violent, uncivilised 
Rama with his axe, who devastates the rest of humanity; 
later we get the divine spiritual Rama, who consecrates family 
life and affections, and Krsna, who exhorts us to enter into the 
warfare of the world ; and after him Buddha, who, full of com- 
passion for all life, works for the redemption of mankind. Last 
of all we have the avatar yet to come, the militant God 
(Kalki) who fights evil and injustice with the sword in hand. 
Great crises in human progress are signalised by the appear- 
ance of avatars. 


VI 

The World of Change 

To know the exact place of the maya theory in the Gita, 
it is necessary to distinguish the different senses in which the 
word is employed, and the exact bearings of the Gita on them 
all. (i) If the supreme reality is unaffected by the events of 
the world, then the rise of these events becomes an inexplicable 
mystery. The author of the Gita does not use the term maya 
in this sense, however much it may be implied in his views, 
the conception of a beginningless, and at the same time 
unreal, avidya causing the illusion of the world does not 
enter the mind of the author. (2) The personal Isvara is said 



THE THEISM OF THE BHAGAVADGlTA 547 


to combine within himself sat and asat, the immutability of 
Brahman as well as the mutation of becoming. 1 Maya is the 
power which enables him to produce mutable nature. It is 
Sakti, or the energy of Isvara, or atmavibhuti, the power of 
self-becoming. Bvara and maya in this sense are mutually 
dependent and are both beginningless. 2 This power of the 
supreme is called maya in the Gita. 3 (3) Since the Lord is 
able to produce the universe by means of the two elements of 
His being, prakrti and purusa, matter and consciousness, 
they are said to be maya (higher and lower) of God . 4 
(4) Gradually maya comes to mean the lower prakrti, since 
purusa is said to be the seed which the Lord casts into the 
womb of prakrti for the generation of the universe. (5) As 
the manifested world hides the real from the vision of the 
mortals, it is said to be delusive in its character. 5 The world 
is not an illusion .though by regarding it as a mere mechanical 
determination of nature unrelated to God, we fail to perceive 
its divine essence. It becomes the source of delusion. The 
divine maya becomes avidyamaya. It is so, however, 
only for us mortals, shut off from the truth ; to God who knows 
it all and controls it, it is vidyamaya. Maya to man is a 
source of trouble and misery, since it breeds a bewildering 
partial consciousness which loses hold of the full reality. 
God seems to be enveloped in the immense cloak of maya. 6 
(6) Since the world is only an effect of God, who is the cause, 
and since everywhere the cause is more real than the effect, 
the world as effect is said to be less real than God the cause. 
This relative unreality of the world is confirmed by the 
self-contradictory nature of the process of becoming. There is 
a struggle of opposites in the world of experience, and the 
real is above all opposites .7 

There is, however, no indication that the changes of the 
world are only imaginary. 8 Even Samkara’s non-dualism 

1 ix. ig. j See !§andilya Sutras, ii. 13 and 15. 

3 xviii. 61 ; iv. 6. 4 iv. 16. 5 vii. 14 ; vii. 25. 

6 Maya which does not produce avidya is said to be sattviki maya. When 
it is polluted it breeds ignorance, or avidya. Brahman reflected in the 
former is Isvara, while that reflected in the latter is jlva, or the individual elf. 
This is later Vedanta, see Pancadasi, i. 15-17. The Gita is not aware oi 
this view. 

7 ii. 45 ; vii. 28. 


VOL. I 


1 iii. 28; iv. 6; vii. 14; xiv. 23. 

18*. 



548 


INDIAN PHILOSOPHY 


admits of real changes in the world ; only the first change 
of Brahman into the world is regarded by him as an appearance, 
or vivarta. The world is a real emanation from the supreme 
Purusottama ; only from the ultimate point of view it is not 
real, since it is ever at war with itself. The Gita repudiates 
the view that “ the world is untrue, without any fixed basis, 
devoid of any ruler, brought about by union caused by lust 
and nothing else.” 1 It follows that in the world we have a 
real development presided over by I £ vara. We cannot say 
that the Gita looked upon the world as real only so long as 
we lived in it. There is no suggestion that the world is a 
troublous dream on the bosom of the infinite. While living 
in the world of becoming, it is possible, according to the Gita, 
to possess the immortality of timeless self-existence. We have 
the supreme example of Purusottama, who makes use of the 
world undeluded by it. When we transcend maya, time, 
space and cause do not fall away from us. The world does 
not disappear, but it only changes its meaning. 

Purusottama is not a remote phenomenon in some 
supreme state beyond us all, but is in the body and heart of 
every man and thing. He maintains all existences in relation 
to one another. The world of souls and matter is the effect 
of his nature. God does not create the world out of a nothing- 
ness or a void, but from His own being. In the pralaya 
condition the whole world, including jivas, exists in the divine 
in a subtle state. In the manifested state they are cut off 
from one another and forget their identity of source. All 
this is his sovereign yoga. The world is compared to a tree 
“ with root above and branches below.” » Prakrti is a general 
feature of the world. The interminable antagonisms, the 
mutual devourings of the various forms of existence, the 
evolving, the differentiating, the organising and the vivifying 
of matter are all due to prakrti. “ Earth, water, fire, air, 
space, mind, buddhi or understanding, self-sense or ahamkara 
are the eight-fold divisions of my prakrti.” This is God’s 
lower nature. That which vitalises these and sustains the 
world is His higher. 3 Ramanuja writes : “ The prakrti, or 
the material nature of the universe, is an object of enjoyment ; 

1 xvi. 8. 1 xv. i. 

I vii. 4-5 ; see also R.B.G. on vii. 4-5. 



THE THEISM OF THE BHAGAVADGlTA 549 


that which is other than this, which is insentient and object 
of enjoyment, is the life principle jiva, which is of a different 
order. It is the enjoyer of the lower one, and is in the form 
of intelligent souls.” The Gita supports Ramanuja’s view of 
reality, if we ignore its absolutist background and emphasise 
^he idea of Purusottama with its dual nature of conscious- 
ness and matter. The metaphor of beads and string, according 
to Ramanuja, points out how “ the totality of intelligences 
and non-intelligent things, both in their state of cause and in 
the state of effect, which form my body, are like a number 
of gems on a string that hangs from me, who have mv being 
in the Atman.” 1 

The individual soul is said to be a portion of the lord, 
mamaivamsah. 2 fsamkara is not faithful to the intention of 
the author of the Gita when he says that “ amsa,” or part, 
indicates an imaginary or apparent part only. It is a real 
form of Purusottama. Samkara’s position is correct if 
the reference is to the indivisible Brahman, who is partless, 
but then even Purusottama is imaginary, since there is in 
him an element of not-self. The actual individual is a kartr 
or doer ; so he is not the pure immortal spirit, but the personal 
self, which is a limited manifestation of God. This portion is 
kept distinct on account of the form which it draws to itself, 
the senses and the mind. As the prakrti has a definite 
magnitude, duration and vibration, even so does purusha 
acquire a definite extent and reach of consciousness. The 
universal is embodied in a limited context of a mental-vital- 
physical sheath. “ Purusa joined with prakrti enjoys the 
qualities born of nature and the cause of its birth, good or 
evil, is its connexion with the qualities.” 3 

VII 

The Individual Self 

The individuals are subject to maya, or delusion, being lost 
in outer appearances. 4 Birth in the world of samsara is 
the result of imperfection. Rotation in the circle of existence 

1 R.B.G., vii. 7. 

1 xiii. 21. 


* xv. 7. 

« vn. 13 ; 26 . 27. 



550 


INDIAN PHILOSOPHY 


is inevitable so long as we are blind to the truth. We get 
rid of individuality when we transcend maya and realise our 
true status. Any form the individual assumes is doomed to 
be superseded. The individual always tries to become some- 
thing else. The infinite character cannot become fully explicit 
in any finite existence. It ever keeps on transcending its 
own finite self until the becoming reaches its end in being 
and the finite is taken over into the infinite. The finite 
world is an endless progress, an infinite perfectibility, an ever 
approximating approach to an ever-growing object of desire. 
It follows that all distinctions based on becoming and 
connexions with prakrti are only transient. The etemality 
and plurality of purusas is assumed in the Gita when its 
thought rests at the level of Purusottama. The jivas, then, 
are only distinct fragments of Purusottama individualised. 
From the standpoint of absolute truth, their individuality is 
dependent upon the object element. Even in this world 
those acts indicative of separate individuality are not due to 
the immortal actionless spirit, but are derived from the forces 
of prakrti. “ The qualities born of prakrti constrain every- 
body to some action.” 1 If the puru§as are eternal, it cannot 
be any delusion to think that they are the doers and are 
different from each other. The Gita says : ” He whose mind is 
deluded by egoism thinks himself the doer of actions which 
are wrought by the qualities of prakrti.” “ Qualities move 
among qualities.” 2 It is a confusion with the object that 
is responsible for the false view of individuality. The basis 
of distinction is then not-self, while the self is the same in 
all, “ dog or dog-eater.” 3 It is easy for Samkara to press all 
these passages into the service of his non-dualism. He says : 
“ Nor are there what are called ultimate differentiae, or 
antyaviSesas, as the basis of individual distinctions in the 
self, since no evidence can be adduced to prove their existence 
in relation to the several bodies. Hence Brahman is homo- 
geneous and one.” 4 We need not assume indefinable marks 
of individual identity to account for the distinctions of the 
world. Individuals are different because of their embodi- 
ments. As the Mahabharata says : “ A man bound up with 

1 iii. 5. * iii. 27-28. 

i v. 18 ; xiii. 2. 22. 4 S.B.G., y. 19. 



THE THEISM OF THE BHAGAVADGlTA 551 


gv.nas is a jivatma, or individual soul ; when freed from them, 
he is paramatma, or supreme soul.” 1 Passages which 
proclaim the identity of the individual with the supreme are 
interpreted by Ramanuja in a different way. For example, 
the declaration that “ Brahman in each possesses hands and 
feet everywhere and envelops all ” is taken by Ramanuja 
to mean that “ the purified nature of the Atman, by virtue 
of its being devoid of the limitations of the body and such 
other objects, pervades all things.” 3 Again, when the Gita 
says that the Purusa in each is “ the witness, the permitter, 
the supporter, the enjoyer, the great lord and the supreme 
self,” Ramanuja is perplexed. “ Such a purusa, by virtue 
of his connexion with gunas, produced by the prakrti, 
becomes the great ruler only with reference to this body, 
and the highest Atman only with reference to this 
body.” 3 

From an occasional singular or plural usage we cannot 
draw any inference about the ultimate nature of the soul. 
When the stress is on the empirical side the plural number 
is used. “ Never did I not exist, nor thou, nor these rulers 
of men ; and no one of us will ever hereafter cease to exist.” 4 
It is easy to infer from this a doctrine of the eternal plurality 
of souls. Ramanuja observes : “ the Lord Himself declares 
that the distinction of the self from the Lord as well as 
from other selves is the highest reality.” Samkara, on the 
other hand, urges “ as the self, the Atman, w r e are eternal in 
all the three periods of time (past, present and future).” 
He believes that the plural is used with reference to the 
bodies, which are different, as is clear from the next verse 
relating to rebirth and not with reference to self. Meta- 
physically there is only one spirit. 5 

The Gita believes in rebirth until the ultimate state is 
reached. Birth following upon imperfection is bound to 
death, and vice versa. Birth and death occur as infancy, 
youth and age occur to a man’s frame. 


* ^antiparva, 187. 24. 

» R.B.G., xii. 13. 

1 R.B.G., xiii. 23 ; see also xiii. 33. 
< R.B.G. and S.B.G., ii. 12. 
s viii. 4 ; xiii. 31. 



552 


INDIAN PHILOSOPHY 


Nay, but as when one layeth 
His wornout robes away 
And taking new ones, sayeth 
“ These will I wear to-day.’’ 

So putteth by the spirit 
Lightly its garb of flesh, 

And passeth to inherit 
A residence afresh. 1 

Death only changes the scene. The instrument through 
which the player can express himself must be intact. The 
gradual failure of powers in old age, or their temporary failure 
in illness, though physical, reacts on the core of mind’s being. 
When the body dies he is supplied with a new instrument. Our 
life does not die with us : when one body wears out it will 
take another. The kind of birth depends on the character we 
have developed. We are born in celestial regions, or as men 
on earth, or in the animal world, according as we develop 
character in which sattva, rajas or tamas predominates. 
Every step we gain is conserved for us. When Arjuna asks 
Krsna about the fate of those who are not able to attain 
perfection, whether they go to ruin, Krsna says that a man 
who does good never goes to ruin, but he obtains another birth 
“ when he recovers the mental characteristics of his former life, 
and with them he again struggles onward for perfection.” 3 
There is a conservation of all values. None can lose the way 
of the supreme if his heart is set on it. Rebirth continues 
till the goal is reached.3 The suksma sarira, or the subtle 
body, consisting of the senses and the mind, survives death 
and is the bearer of character.4 Rebirth is a discipline by 
which we can perfect ourselves. There is also a reference to 
the path of the gods through which the samsarins pass. 5 
The third path of the sinful is also mentioned. 6 

VIII 

Ethics 

The distinctness of particular persons, their finiteness and 
individuality, are only accidental, and do not represent the 

■ ii. 22. Sir Edwin Arnold’s translation. See also ii. 13 ; ii. 27. 

* vi. 44-5. * vii. 19. 4 xv. 8. 

i viii. 23-26. ‘ ix. 12 ; xvi. 19-21. 



THE THEISM OF THE BHAGAVADGlTA 553 


underlying truth. The individual will not gain the secret 
of peace, stable and secure, until he breaks down his apparent 
self-completeness and independence. True freedom means 
self-transcendence or union with the highest through logic, 
love or life. The end we seek is becoming Brahman or 
touching the eternal, brahmasariisparsam. This is the only 
absolute value . 1 

It is in the power of all to destroy evil, to eliminate the 
corruption of the flesh, to redeem the lower nature and rescue 
the senses from bondage to passion. Each struggling indi- 
vidual will have to make a sustained endeavour to look into the 
truth with his own eyes, judge with his own reason, and love 
with his own heart A half-truth won for ourselves is worth 
more than a whole truth learned from others. 

Man is a complex of reason, will and emotion, and so seeks 
the true delight of his being through all these. He can reach 
the end by a knowledge of the supreme reality, or by love 
and adoration of the supreme person, or by the subjection of 
his will to the divine purpose. There is the impulse in him 
forcing him to get beyond his little self in these different 
directions. The end is the same whichever standpoint we 
adopt. It is the harmonious efficiency of the several sides of 
our life by which truth is attained, beauty created and conduct 
perfected. The Gita is emphatic that no side of conscious 
life can be excluded. The several aspects reach their fulfil- 
ment in the integral divine life. God himself is sat, cit and 
ananda, reality, truth and bliss. The absolute reveals itself 
to those seeking for knowledge as the Eternal Light, clear 
and radiant as the sun at noon-day in which is no darkness ; 
to those struggling for virtue as the Eternal Righteousness, 
steadfast and impartial ; and to those emotionally inclined 
as Eternal Love and Beauty of Holiness. Even as God com- 
bines in Himself wisdom, goodness and holiness, so should men 
aim at the integral life of spirit. The obstructions of the road 
are not operative when we reach the end. It is true that in 
the finite life of the individual there seems to be some kind of 
antagonism between contemplation and action. This is only 
a sign of our imperfection. When Krsna is asked about the 
particular method to be adopted, he clearly says that we need 
* vi. 20, 23, 27 and 28. 



554 


INDIAN PHILOSOPHY 


not worry about this question, since the different pathways 
are not ultimately distinct, but lead to the same goal, and are 
found together in the end though they cross and recross one 
another on the road. Man does not function in fractions. 
Progress is correlated and not dissociated development. 
Knowledge, feeling and will are different aspects of the one 
movement of the soul. 

The Gita tries to harmonise the different ideals of life 
current at the time and correct their extravagances. 
Intellectual inquiry, strenuous self-sacrifice, fervent devotion, 
ceremonial observance and yogic exercises were looked upon 
as affording access to the divine . 1 The Gita synthesises them 
all and shows the exact place and value of each of them. 
It believes in the effectiveness of a combined attack. The 
harmonising ideal which all these different methods have in 
view is the increasing solidarity of the individual with the 
universe presided over by Purusottama. 

Madhusudana Sarasvati considers that the Gita adopts the 
three methods indicated in the Upanisads, karma or work, 
upasana or worship, and jnana or wisdom, and devotes six 
chapters to each in succession. Whatever be the truth of 
it, it emphasises the three great divisions of conscious life. 
The Gita recognises that different men are led to the spiritual 
vision by different approaches, some by the perplexities of 
the moral life, some by the doubts of the intellect, and some 
by the emotional demands for perfection. 


IX 

JSana Marga 

The logical mind, unable to acquiesce in the partial, tries 
to grasp the totality of things, and finds no rest until it is 

1 Cf. Ploti' us : " There are different roads by which this end (of spiritual 
apprehension) may be reached : the love of beauty which exalts the poet ; that 
devotion to the One and that ascent of science which make the ambition 
of the philosopher ; that love and those prayers by which some devout and 
ardent soul tends in its moral purity towards perfection. These are the 
great highways conducting to that height above the actual and the particular, 
where we stand in the immediate presence of the Infinite, who shines out 
as from the deeps of the soul." (Letter to Flaccus.) 



THE THEISM OF THE BHAGAYAHGlTA 555 


anchored in the truth. It is buoyed up by the undying faith 
in its destiny to acquire supreme truth. 1 The Gita recognises 
two kinds of knowledge, that which seeks to understand 
the phenomena of existence externally through intellect, 
and that which by the force of intuition grasps the ultimate 
principle behind the apparent series. When subject to the 
logical intellect, the spirit of man tends to lose itself in nature 
and identify itself with its activities. To grasp the truth 
of existence in its source and reality within, it has to free 
itself from the snare of false identification. The intellectual 
apprehension of the details of existence is called vijnana, as 
distinct from jnana, or the integral knowledge of the common 
foundation of all existence. These two are only different sides 
of one pursuit. All knowledge is knowledge of God. Science 
and philosophy both try to realise the truth of the oneness 
of things in the eternal spirit. Scientific knowledge is said 
to be dominated by rajas, while spiritual knowledge is per- 
meated by the quality of sattva. If we mistake the partial 
truths of science for the whole truth of spirit, we have the 
inferior knowledge, where the lowest quality of tamas 
predominates. 2 The truth of the soul is a hypothesis so 
long as we are at the level of science. The endless becoming 
covers up the being. Science dispels the darkness oppressing 
the mind, shows up the incompleteness of its own world, and 
prepares the mind for something beyond it. It stimulates 
humility, since by its means we cannot know all. We are 
hemmed in between the forgetfulness of what was and the 
uncertainty of what shall be. To indulge in the imaginative 
desire to become acquainted with the first causes of things 
and the destiny of mankind, science admits, is a vain pursuit. 
If we want to get at the ultimate truth science has to be 
supplemented by another discipline. The Gita holds that 
paripra^na, or investigation, is to be combined with service, 
or seva.5 For the development of the intuitive power we 
require a tunning of the mind in another direction, a conversion 
of the soul. Arjuna could not see the truth with his naked 


1 “ Blessedness consists in love towards God, and this arises from know- 
ledge.” (Spinoza.) " With certain persons the intellectual effort to under- 
stand the universe is a principal way of experiencing the Deity.” (Bradley.) 

2 xviii. 20-22. 1 iv. 34. 



556 


INDIAN PHILOSOPHY 


eyes, and so asked for the divine sight or spiritual vision. 1 
The visvarupa is a poetic exaggeration of the intuitional 
experience where the individual possessed by God sees all 
things in Him The Gita believes that for attaining this 
spiritual vision the individual should learn to live within and 
fix his mind on the highest reality. What hides the truth from 
our vision is not merely the fault of intellect, but also the 
passion of selfishness. Ajnana is not intellectual error, but 
spiritual blindness. To remove it we must cleanse the soul 
of the defilement of the body and the senses, and kindle the 
spiritual vision which looks at things from a new angle. The 
fire of passion and the tumult of desire must be suppressed. 1 
The mind, inconstant and unstable, must be steadied into an 
unruffled lake, that it might mirror the wisdom from above. 
Buddhi, or the power of understanding and discrimination, 
needs to be trained. 3 The way in which this power operates 
depends on our past habits. We should so train it as to bring 
it into agreement with the spiritual view of the universe. 

It is as a means of mental training that the Gita accepts 
the yoga system. The yoga discipline gives the directions 
by which we can lift ourselves from our mutable personality 
into a super-normal attitude, where we possess the key which 
is the secret of the whole play of relations. The essential 
steps of the yogic discipline are : (i) purification of mind, 
body and senses, that the divine may take possession of them; 
(2) concentration or withdrawal of the consciousness from 
the dispersed movement of thoughts running after the senses 
and fixing it on the Supreme ; and (3) identification with the 
real when we reach it. The Gita is not so very systematic 
as Patanjali’s Sutras, though the different sadhanas or 
instruments are referred to.4 

The Gita offers us certain general principles acceptable 
to thinkers of all shades of opinion. We are asked to have 
faith or sraddha,5 subdue the riotous impulses and hold fast 
in thought to God. An atmosphere of stillness and calm 
is necessary for the spiritual vision. In the silence following 


1 xi. Cf. the Prophet’s words, " Lord, open his eyes that he may see." 
See also the vision of Ezekiel and Exodus xxxiii. 18, Revelation, chap, iv, 
and Saddharma Pundarlka, chap. i. 

* iv. 39. 3 ii. 44. 4 Chap. vi. J iv. 39. 



THE THEISM OF THE BHAGAVADGITA 55? 


the firm control of the mind we can hear the voice of the soul. 
The true yoga is that which brings about spiritual impartiality, 
or samatvam. 1 “ Where the mind flickereth not like a lamp 
in a sheltered spot ; where seeing the self by the self, one 
is satisfied in himself ; where one experiences the absolute 
bliss known only to understanding, but ever beyond the senses, 
and standing where one swerves not from the truth ; where 
no other gain is considered greater, and, where placed, one 
is not moved by the greatest pain — that state free from misery 
is yoga.” * It is not necessary for all to practise yoga in 
order that they may attain the spiritual insight. Madhusu- 
dana Saras vatl quotes a verse from Vasistha : “To suppress 
mind with its egoism, etc., yoga and jnana are the two 
means. Yoga is the suppression of mental activity (vrtti- 
nirodha), and jnana is true comprehension (samyagavek- 
sanam). For some yoga is not possible, for others jnana 
is not possible.” 3 The spiritual intuition may also be helped 
by work and worship. 4 

While admitting the relevancy of the yoga discipline 
for spiritual training in some cases, the Gita is not unconscious 
of its dangers.5 By mere fasting and such other methods 
we may only weaken the powers of the senses, while our 
relish for sense-objects may be intact. What is wanted is 
control of senses and indifference to the attractions of material 
objects. This is possible only with the rise of knowledge. 

Spiritual intuition which is more perceptual in character 6 
is not uncritical conviction. It is supported by scientific 
judgment. It is a union of knowledge with austerity and 
passion, the most complete experience that we can possibly 
have, where we have no more confusion of mind, but enjoy 
true peace and rest of spirit. 7 

When once the fullness of cognitive experience is reached, 
the other sides of consciousness, emotion and will, make them- 
selves felt. The vision of God in the spiritual illumination 
is attained in an atmosphere of joy. The whole life-aspiration 
becomes one continuous adoration of the infinite. The 

* ii. 48. * vi. 19-26. 

3 Commentary on the Gita, vi. 29. 

* iv. 42. 

* Lac. 2, Pratyakijavagamam. 


J ii. 59-61. 

J iv. 35; v. 18-21. 



558 


INDIAN PHILOSOPHY 


knower is also a devotee and the best of them. 1 " He who 
knows me worships me.” 2 To know the truth is to lift up 
our hearts to the Supreme, touch Him and adore Him. 3 There 
is also a practical influence. The more profoundly we are 
conscious of our true nature, the deeper is our insight into the 
real needs of others. The good becomes " not merely the key- 
stone of knowledge, but the polestar of conduct ” in the 
famous phrase of Nettleship. We have the example of Buddha, 
the greatest jnani or seer, whose love for humanity led to his 
ministry of mankind for forty years. 

It is sometimes argued that knowledge or intelligence is 
indifferent to morality. Intelligence, it is said, is not an 
essential part of character. Intellectually we make only mis- 
takes or errors of judgment; morally we do wrong. The in- 
tellect is neither good nor bad, since it can be used to promote 
or destroy good life. All this may be true of our analytic 
understanding. Jnana, or the wisdom of the Gita, carries us 
beyond one-sided views and narrow standpoints to the compre- 
hensive truth, where we feel that the differences between men 
are not ultimate, and that no conduct which is based on 
false distinctions can be good. We see that the lives of men 
have a common root, and that a self-existent eternal spirit 
is living and operating in all individual lives. When this 
truth is perceived, sense and self lose their power.4 


X 

Bhakti Marga 

The Bhakti marga, or the path of devotion, indicates the 
law of the right activity of the emotional side of man. Bhakti 
is emotional attachment distinct from knowledge or action.5 
Through it we offer our emotional possibilities to the divine. 
Emotion expresses a living relation between individuals, 
and becomes instinct with the force of religious feeling when 
it binds God and man. If we do not love and worship, we 
become shut within the prison of our own egoism. This way, 
when rightly regulated, leads us to the perception of the 

* vii. 17. * xv. 19. J x. 8-9. 

« ii. 59. J Saijrlilya Sutras, i. 4-5 and 7. 



TIIE THEISM OF THE BHAGAVADGlTA 559 


Supreme. It is open to all, the weak and the lowly, 
the illiterate and the ignorant, 1 and is also the easiest. 
The sacrifice of love is not so difficult as the tuning of the will 
to the divine purpose or ascetic discipline, or the strenuous 
effort of thinking. It is quite as efficacious as any other 
method, and is sometimes said to be greater than others, since 
it is its own fruition, while others are means to some other end. 

The origin of the Bhakti marga is hidden in the mists of 
long ago. The upasana theory of the Upanisads and the 
devotional way of the Bhagavatas have influenced the author 
of the Gita. He struggles to develop an order of ideas be- 
longing to the religious level of the Upanisads to which they 
were not able to give free and unambiguous utterance. The 
absolute becomes in the Gita “ the understanding of them 
that understand, the splendour of the splendid,” 2 the first 
of gods and men, the chief of the rsis, as well as death which 
ravishes all. 3 Admitting that meditation of the unmanifested 
absolute leads to the goal, Krsna urges that it is a hard 
process. 4 It offers no foothold for the finite man from which 
he could approach it. The love which we feel for an object 
involves an element of separateness. However closely 
love may unite, the lover and the beloved remain distinct. 
We have to rest content with a dualism even as thought 
does ; but it is not correct to describe the monism which 
transcends the dualism as a descent to a lower grade. 
Devotion to the Supreme is possible only with a personal 
God, a concrete individual full of bliss and beauty. We 
cannot love a shadow of our minds. Personality implies 
a capacity for fellowship, or communion, or a feeling together. 
There is the personal need for a personal helper. So God, 
into whose being the heart of love enters, is not the God who 
revels in bloodshed, not one who sleeps in serene abstraction 
while hearts heavy-laden cry out for help. He is love.5 
He who gives up his whole to God and falls at His feet finds 
the gates of spirit lie open. The voice of God declares, 
“ This is My word of promise, that he who loveth Me shall 
not perish.” 6 


• ix. 32; see also xi. 53-54. 
3 X. 20-25. 3.4 
( $aranagatavatsala^. 


1 vii. 10. 
4 xii. 5. 

‘ ix. 31. 



560 


INDIAN PHILOSOPHY 


It is not a rigid law of recompense that binds God to the 
world. The consequences of deeds may be averted by means 
of devotion to God. This is no supersession of the law of 
karma, since the law requires that even devotion should have 
its reward. Krsna says : “ Even if a man of evil conduct 
turns to me with a sole and entire love, he must be regarded 
as a saint,” because he has turned to God with a settled will, 
and has therefore become a soul of righteousness. The Lord 
by Himself does not receive the sin or the merit of any. 1 
Yet He has so arranged the scheme of things, that nothing 
happens without producing its effect. In a sense it is true 
that “ the Lord enjoys all sacrifices and penances.” It is 
in this way that we have to reconcile apparently contradictory 
views expressed in passages like “ none is hateful to Me and 
none dear,” and “ the devotees are dear to Me.” 2 Man is 
the object of God’s constant care. 

The nature of love towards God or bhakti is indescribable 
even “ as the taste of the dumb person.” 3 The essential 
features of this emotional attachment may, however, be 
stated. There is the adoration of something looked upon 
as absolutely perfect. Since the object is perfection, nothing 
less than the highest conceivable will do. N jlrada in his 
sutras brings in the analogy of human love, 4 where also the 
finite individual transcends himself and reaches out towards 
an ideal. Only the ideal very frequently reveals its actual 
nature The object of devotion is the highest being, or Puru- 
sottama. He is the illuminator of souls as well as the 
vivifier of the world. God is not to be identified with the 
different elements which seem to be the ultimate realities at a 
lower level, nor is He the lord of sacrifices as the MImamsakas 
imagine. He is not to be confused with the several personal 
agencies which the mind of man attributes to the natural 
forces. He is not the purusa of the Samkhyas. He is all 
these and more. 5 The author of the Gita emphasises how God 
lives in each individual. If the Supreme were quite foreign 
to the individual consciousness, He could not be an object 
of worship ; if He were absolutely identical with the individual, 
even then worship is not possible. He is partly the same as 

• ix. ; v. 15. » ix. 29 ; xii. 14-20 ; see also xvi. 16. 

1 Narada Sutras, 51-52. 1 Ibid,, 23. 5 viii. 4. 



THE THEISM OF THE BHAGAVADGlTA 561 


and partly different from the individual. He is the divine 
Lord associated with prakrti or Laksmi, in whose hands lies 
the treasure of desirable things. The prospect of union with 
Him is a vision of delight. “ Fix thy mind in Me, into Me 
let thy understanding enter ; thou shalt surely live with 
Me alone hereafter.” z All other love is only an imperfect 
manifestation of this supreme love. We love other things 
for the sake of the eternal in them. The devotee has 
a sense of utter humiliation. In the presence of the 
ideal he feels that he is nothing, and such an utter 
prostration of the self is the indispensable pre-requisite 
of true religious devotion. God loves meekness. 2 The in- 
dividual feels himself to be worthless apart from God. His 
devotion expresses itself as either love for God (prlti), 
or misery due to the absence of God (viraha). The self 
cannot but reject itself as worthless dross when it discovers 
the supreme value of the object to which it attaches itself. 
The devotee throws himself entirely on the mercy of God. 
Absolute dependence is the only way. “ Merge thy mind 
in Me, be My devotee, prostrate thyself before Me, thou shalt 
come even unto Me. I pledge thee My troth, thou art dear 
to Me. Abandoning all dharmas, come unto Me alone for 
shelter ; sorrow not, I will liberate thee from all sins.” 3 God 
insists on undivided devotion, and assures us that He will 
take up our knowledge and our error and cast away all 
forms of insufficiency and transform all into His infinite 
light and the purity of the universal good. Again, there 

is the continual desire to serve the ideal. The devotee 

“looks only on the object of his devotion, talks only 
about Him and thinks only of Him.” t Whatever he 
does he does for the glory of God. His work is absolutely 
unselfish, since it is indifferent to its fruits. It is an utter 
self-giving to the transcendent. 5 When the devotee surrenders 
himself completely into the hands of the ideal, we do not have 
a blind intensity of feeling. It is an open-armed surrender 
in which feeling is displaced by life. God becomes the ruling 
passion of the mind. The devotee reaches his end, becomes 
immortal and satisfied in himself. He does not desire any- 


1 xii. 8. 

3 B.G., xviii. 64-66. 


* Narada Sutras, 27, dainyaprivatvam. 
4 Narada Sutras, 55. 5 B.G., ix. 28. 



562 


INDIAN PHILOSOPHY 


thing, sorrows not ; he is filled with joy and peace — rapt 
in the spirit. 1 Bhakti, or true devotion, according to the Gita, 
is to believe in God, to love Him, to be devoted to Him and 
to enter into Him. It is its own reward. 

For the true bhakti, we require first of all SraddhS. or faith. 
The highest reality has to be assumed or taken on faith till 
it reveals itself in the devotee’s consciousness.* Since faith 
is a vital element, the gods in whom the people have faith are 
tolerated. In view of the unlimited variety of the habits 
and minds of men, liberty of thought and worship is allowed 
to the individual. Some love is better than none, for if 
we do not love, we become shut up within ourselves. The 
infinite presents itself to the human soul in a variety of aspects. 
The lower gods are forms or aspects of the one Supreme. The 
Gita ranks the avatars of the divine as lower than Purusot- 
tama ; Brahma, Visnu and Siva, if they are not names for 
the Supreme acting as creator, preserver and destroyer, 
are also subordinated to Purusottama.3 The worship of 
Vedic gods is admitted.t Out of a feeling of pity, the 
Gita allows freedom to the multitudes worshipping ksudra 
devatas or petty divinities. So long as worship is done with 
devotion it purifies the heart and prepares the mind for the 
higher consciousness. 5 

The philosophical justification of this tolerant attitude 
is suggested though not worked out. A man is what his 
thoughts are. Whatever he has faith in, that he will 
attain to. The world is a purposive moral order, where 
the individual obtains what he desires. “ Those who make 
vows to the gods go to the gods ; those who make vows to 
manes go to them.” 6 “ Whichever form any worshipper 

wishes to worship with faith, to that form I render his faith 
steady. Possessed of that faith, he seeks to propitiate that 
deity, and obtains from it those beneficial things which are 
really given by Me.” 7 As Ramanuja observes: “From 
Brahma to a reed, all things that live in the world are subject 
to birth and death caused by karma, therefore they cannot 
be helpful as objects of meditation.” Only the true Lord 

» Narada Sutras, 4-7. Mattah, stabdhati, atmaramah. 

* iv. 40. 3 xi. 37. 4 ix. 23. 5 vii. 21-23. 

* ix, 25 ; see also xvii. 3. 7 vii. 20-21. 



THE THEISM OF THE BHAGAVADGlTA 563 


Purusottama can serve as the object of devotion. The 
lower forms are stepping-stones to it. In chapter x we are 
called upon to fix our mind on particular objects and persons 
displaying power and grandeur to an extraordinary degree. 
This is called pratlka upasana. In chapter xi the whole 
universe assumes the form of God. In chapter xii we dwell 
on the presiding God. Only the highest can give us freedom. 
Other devotees reach finite ends, while the devotees of the 
Supreme reach infinite bliss. 1 

The forms which bhakti takes are contemplation of God’s 
power, wisdom and goodness, constant remembrance of Him 
with a devout heart, conversing about His qualities with other 
persons, singing His praises with fellow-men and doing all 
acts as His service. 2 No fixed rules can be laid down. By 
these different movements the human soul draws near to the 
divine. Several symbols and disciplines are devised to train 
the mind to turn godward. Absolute devotion to God is 
not possible unless we give up our desires for sense-objects. 
So yoga is sometimes adopted. 3 The impulse may take any 
form of adoration, from external worship to a periodical 
reminder to free us from the preoccupations of life. The 
Gita asks us sometimes to think of God, excluding all other 
objects. This is a negative method. 4 It also requires us to 
look upon the whole world as a supreme manifestation of 
God. 5 We have to realise God in nature and self, and so 
regulate our conduct as to make it expressive of the divine 
in man. Supreme devotion and complete self-surrender, or 
bhakti and prapatti, are the different sides of the one fact. 
The Gita recognises that the one infinite God can be 
approached and worshipped through any of His aspects. 
This tolerant spirit has made Hinduism a synthesis of 
different kinds of worship and experience, an atmosphere 
unifying many cults and creeds, a system of thought or 
a spiritual culture based on the fact that the one truth has 
many sides. 

In the highest fulfilment of devotion, we possess a sense 

' Anto brahmadibhaktanam madbhaktanam anantata. . . . Madhva’» 
commentary on the Gita, vii. 21. 

* Narada Sutras, 16-18. 

♦ B.G., xviii. 73. 


i Ibid, 47-49.. 

5 Chaps vi and xi. 



564 


INDIAN PHILOSOPHY 


of certitude about the obj ect . The experience is self-certifying 
in character. It is its own proof, svayam pramanam. 
Logical discussions are not of much avail. The true devotees 
do not worry about vain discussions concerning God. 1 This 
is the highest kind of bhakti, from which there is no transition 
to anything else. It is devotion that is constant, mrantara, 
unmotived nirhetuka* Few there are who are willing to serve 
God for naught. The Gita has not the weakness of emotional 
religions which deny knowledge and will for the sake of love. 
While all devotees are dear to the Lord, the possesser of wisdom 
is the dearest of all. 3 The other three classes of devotees, 
the suffering, the seeker of knowledge and the selfish, may have 
petty aims and cease to love God when their desires are 
fulfilled, but the seer worships Him ever in purity of spirit . * 
Bhakti, or intense love for God, becomes then a fire, scorching, 
burning and consuming all limits of individuality. The 
vision of truth is revealed. Without this restraint of the 
spiritual truth, the Gita religion might lapse into emotionalism, 
and devotion itself might become a mere carnival of feeling. 

What begins as quiet prayer, a longing for the sight of 
the beloved, ends in an irresistible rapture of love and delight. 
The worshipper becomes incorporate with God’s being. 
He feels the force of the truth of the oneness of God in the 
universe. " Vasudevah sarvam iti.” He escapes from the 
loneliness of life and the insignificance of a world where he 
was a mere particular to one where he becomes the instrument 
of the central Spirit. 5 The largest human personality is 
only a partial expression of it. The genuine nature of each 
individual is the eternal spirit revealing itself in time and 
space. Knowledge and devotion become interdependent. 6 
True devotion issues in unselfish conduct. The devotee is 
consumed by an all-embracing beneficent love that seeks not 
its own or any return for its overflowing. It is like the divine 
love that brought the universe into being, maintains it and 
lifts it up to itself. Not the devotee but the power of spirit 
acts in him in a divine freedom. Absolute self-surrender and 

> Narada Sutras, 58 and 75. 

* B.G., vii. 17-18 ; viii. 14-22 ; Bhagavata, iii. 29-12. 

5 vii. 17. 4 xviii. 5. 

I B.G., xviii. 46 ; vii. 19 ; viii. 7. * Narada Sutras, 28-29. 



THE THEISM OF THE BHAGAVADGITA 565 


the dedication of all work to God mark the conduct of the true 
devotee. He has thus in him the content of the highest 
philosophy as well as the energy of the perfect man. Though 
here and there we come across passionate souls who do not 
worry about the affairs of the world, still the ideal devotee 
of the Gita is one in whom love is lighted up by knowledge 
and bursts forth into a fierce desire to suffer for mankind. 
Tilak quotes a &loka from Visnu Purana, which says : “ Those 
who give up their duties and sit down uttering the name 
Krsna, Krsna, are really the enemies of God and sinners. 
Even the Lord took birth in the world for the sake of righteous- 
ness.” 1 

It is obvious that for those who insist on devotion as the 
final nature of spiritual life, the end is not an immersion in 
the eternal impersonal, but a union with the Purushottama. 
The Gita, however, recognises nirguna bhakti, or devotion to 
the qualityless, as superior to all else. Then the absolute 
becomes the most ultimate category. 2 When devotion is 
perfected, then the individual and his God become suffused 
into one spiritual ecstasy, and reveal themselves as aspects 
of one life. Absolute monism is therefore the completion of 
the dualism with which the devotional consciousness starts. 


XI 

Karma Marga 

Through divine service or karma we can also reach the 
highest. Karma is act or deed, even that by which the 
impersonal becomes personal. 3 Karma is said to be beginning- 
less, and the exact manner by which the work of the world 
proceeds is hard to understand. 4 At the end of creation the 
whole world is said to lie in the form of a subtle karma seed 
ready to sprout again at the next start. 5 Since the world 
process is dependent upon the Lord, we can call Him the 
lord of karma. 6 We are committed to some action or other. 

■ See B.G., ix. 30; cf. 1 John ii. 9-1 1, iv. 18-20. 

* See Bhagavata, iii. 29; vii. 14. 

1 vii. 24-25. « iv. 17. 

1 viii. 18-19. ‘ vii. 22. 



56G INDIAN PHILOSOPHY 

It is necessary to see to it that our conduct promotes the 
interests of righteousness, which at the same time results in 
spiritual rest and satisfaction. Karma marga is the path 
of conduct by which the individual thirsting for service can 
reach the goal. 

At the time of the Gita many different views of right 
conduct prevailed, viz. the Vedic theory of the observance 
of rites and ceremonies, the Upanisad doctrine of a search 
after truth, the Buddhistic idea of the giving up of all actions 
and the theistic view of the worship of God. The Gita tries 
to round them all into a consistent system. 

The Gita recognises that it is through work that we are 
brought into relation with the rest of the world. The problem 
of morality has significance only in the human world. The 
self of man alone of the objects of the world possesses a sense 
of responsibility. The individual aspires after spiritual happi- 
ness, but he cannot derive it from the material elements of 
the world. The pleasure which he strives after is of different 
kinds. What is derived from a deluded mind and false 
desires has more of tamas in it ; what is derived from the 
senses has more of rajas, and the pleasure of self-knowledge 
has more of sattva in it . 1 The highest satisfaction can 
come only when the individual ceases to look upon himself 
as an independent agent and feels that God in His infinite 
grace guides the world. The spirit in man is satisfied if it 
sees the spirit in the world . 2 Good work is that which helps 
us to the liberation of the individual and the perfection of 
spirit. 

Right conduct is whatever expresses our real unity with 
God, man, and nature ; wrong conduct is whatever does not 
bring out this essential structure of reality. The unity of 
the universe is the basic principle. Good is whatever 
advances towards completeness, and evil is whatever is 
inconsistent with it. This is the essential difference between 
Buddhism and the Gita. Buddhism no doubt made morality 
central to the good life, but it did not sufficiently emphasise 
the relation of moral life to spiritual perfection or the purpose 
of the universe. In the Gita we are assured that even though 

1 ii. 71 ; vi. 22. 15. 2S ; xii. 12 ; xvii. 6a ; xviii. 36-38. 

• Plato: Republic, ix. 



THE THEISM OF THE BIIAGAVADGITA 5G7 


we may fail in our efforts, the central divine purpose can never 
be destroyed. It points out that the soul of the world is 
just, in spite of all appearances to the contrary. The 
individual fulfils his destiny when he becomes the instrument 
of the increasing purpose of God. 

The finite centres should look upon themselves as members 
of an organism and work for the sake of the whole. The 
false claim to absoluteness and the wrong view that his 
independence is limited by that of others should be abandoned. 
The true ideal is lokasamgraha, or the solidarity of the world. 
The spirit of the whole works in the world. The good man 
should co-operate with it and aim at the welfare of the world. 1 
The Gita repudiates the notion of individual claims. The 
best people have the largest burdens to bear. The venture 
of finite beings implies evil that has to be overcome. We 
cannot shrink from the task of fighting sin and injustice. 
The hesitating Arjuna was persuaded by Kr$na to fight, 
not for love of glory or lust of kingdom, but for the sake of the 
law of righteousness ; but when we fight injustice we should 
do so, not in passion or ignorance which brings grief and 
disquiet, but in knowledge and with love for all. 1 

Sense control becomes a characteristic of the good man. 
Passion imprisons our spiritual nature. It deadens discretion 
and fetters reason. To give full rein to the untamed impulses 
is to enslave the soul dwelling in the body.3 The Gita requires 
us to develop a spirit of detachment and indifference to the 
results of action, the spirit of yoga, or impartiality. 4 True 
renunciation consists in this. Giving up acts out of ignorance 
is tyaga mixed with tamas ; giving up acts out of fear of 
consequences such as bodily suffering is tyaga with rajas 
in it ; doing work in a spirit of detachment without fear 
of consequences is the best form, since it has more of sattva 
in it. 5 

It is necessary to understand the exact bearing of 
the Gita on the question of work. It does not support 
an ascetic ethics. The Buddhistic theory of inaction is 
interpreted in a more positive way. True inaction is action 
without any hope of reward. Analysing the nature of tha 

1 v. 25 ; xii. 4. * xi. 55, J vi. 46 ; viii. 27. 

4 vi. 46; viii. 27. 5 xvii. 7-9, 11-12. 



568 


INDIAN PHILOSOPHY 


act of karma, the Gita distinguishes the mental antecedents 
from the outer deed, and calls upon us to control the former 
by suppressing all selfishness. 1 Naiskarmya, or abstention 
from action, is not the true law of morality, but niskamata, 
or disinterestedness. 1 * * * Passion, anger and covetousness, the 
three ways to hell, are to be overcome. 3 All desires are not 
bad. The desire after righteousness is divine. 4 The Gita, 
instead of demanding a rooting out of our passions, asks for 
a purifying of them. The physical-vital nature is to be 
cleansed, the mental-intellectual nature is to be purified, 
and then the spiritual nature finds its satisfaction. 5 The 
Gita is certain that inertia is not liberty. “ Nor indeed 
can embodied beings completely relinquish action.” 6 

The eye cannot choose but see, 

We cannot bid the ear be still, 

Our bodies feel where’er they be 
Against of with our will. 7 

Rest is not on earth ; it is all life for ever. Work keeps up 
the circuit of the world, and each individual should try his 
best to keep it going. 8 The whole setting of the Gita points 
out that it is an exhortation to action. Work is inevitable 
till we attain freedom. We have to work for the sake of 
freedom, and when we attain it, we have to work as instru- 
ments of the divine. Then, of course, there is no more work 
necessary for preparing the mind or purifying the heart. 
The freed souls have no rules to obey, they do what they 
please, but the vital point is they do something.9 

The Gita asks us to act in a way when action does not 
bind. The Lord Himself acts for the sake of humanity. 
Though from the absolute standpoint He is self-contained 
and desireless, He has always something to accomplish in 
the world. Even so is Arjuna asked to fight and do his work. 
The free souls have also the obligation to help others to 

1 xviii. 18. * v. ii ; xviii. 49. 

3 ii. 62-63; x vi. 21. * vii. 11. 

5 Pusfi, tusfi and santi are the respective ideals of the vital, the in- 

tellectual and the spiritual sides of human nature. 

6 xviii. 11. 7 Wordsworth. 

8 iii. 10 16. 3 Brh. Up., yi. 4. 22 ; S.B., iii. 32. 



THE THEISM OF THE BHAGAYADGlTA 569 


discover the divine in themselves. Service of humanity is 
worship of God. 1 To work desirelessly and impersonally 
for the sake of the world and God does not bind us. “Nor 
do these works bind Me, enthroned on high, unattached to 
actions.” 1 * * The Gita draws a distinction between sannyasa 
and tyaga : “ Sannyasa is renouncing all interested works ; 
tyaga is giving up the fruit of all work.” 3 The latter is more 
comprehensive. The Gita does not ask us to abhor the 
common business of life, but demands the suppression of all 
selfish desires. It is a combination of pravrtti, or work, and 
nivrtti, or withdrawal, that the Gita upholds. Mere with- 
drawal is not true renunciation. The hands may be at rest, 
but the desires may be busy. What binds is not work, but 
the spirit in which it is done. “ The giving up of karmas by 
the ignorant is really a positive act ; the work of the wise 
is really inaction.” 4 The inner life of spirit is compatible 
with active life in the world. The Gita reconciles the two 
in the spirit of the Upanisads. Action in the way indicated 
by the Gita is skilled action. “ Yogah karmasu kausalam,” 
yoga is skill in works. 5 

Whatever we do has to be done not in subjection to an 
external law, but in obedience to the inner determination 
of the soul’s freedom. This is the highest kind of action. 
Aristotle says : “ He is best who acts on his own convictions, 
while he is second best who acts in obedience to the counsel 
of others.” 6 To the unregenerate the scriptures are the 
authority. The injunctions of the Vedas are only external, 
and do not bind us when we reach the highest condition, 
where we act naturally in accordance with the law of 
spirit. 

All work has to be done in purity of motive. We have 
to exclude from our minds subtle shades of selfishness, pre- 
ferences for special forms of work, desire for sympathy and 
applause. Good karma, if it is to purify the mind and lead us 
to wisdom, should be performed in this spirit. The selfish 
egoist who looks upon himself as a god on earth and hunts 

1 xviii. 46. * ix. 9 ; iv. 13-14. 

3 xviii. 2. 4 Astavakraglta, xviii. 61. 

5 ii. 50, 48 ; iii. 3 ; iv. 42 ; vi. 33, 46. 

* Ethics, i. 4. 7. 



570 


INDIAN PHILOSOPHY 


after sense-pleasures is a demon adopting materialism in 
metaphysics and sensualism in ethics. 1 

The theory of the gunas or qualities plays an important 
part in the Gita ethics. 2 The bondage to gunas causes the 
feeling of limitedness. The bonds belonging to mind are 
erroneously attributed to the self. Though action saturated 
with sattva is said to be the best kind of action, 3 it is also 
urged that even sattva binds, since a nobler desire brings 
about a purer ego. For full freedom all egoism should cease. 
The ego, however pure it may be, is an obstructing veil 
and binds itself to knowledge and bliss. Getting beyond all 
qualities and occupying an impersonal cosmic outlook form 
the ideal state.4 e 

The Gita transforms the Vedic theory of sacrifices and 
reconciles it with true spiritual knowledge.5 The outer gift 
is a symbol of the inner spirit. The sacrifices are attempts 
to develop self-restraint and self-surrender. The true 
sacrifice is the sacrifice of the sense delights. The god to 
whom w'e offer is the great Supreme, or the Yajna Purusa, 
the lord of sacrifices. 6 We have to feel that all objects 
are divinely appointed means for the realisation of the highest 
ends and engage ourselves in work, resigning it all to God. 
Whether we eat or drink or whatsoever we do we should do 
all to the glory of God. A yogin always acts in God, and 
his conduct becomes a model for imitation by others.7 
The Gita lays down several general principles for the 
regulation of human conduct. The golden mean is advised 
in some passages. 8 The Gita recognises the caste 
divisions as well as the theory of the stages of life. 
Men on a lower level of feeling and thought cannot all 
of a sudden be lifted up into a higher state. The 
humanising process takes a long time, sometimes several 
generations. The Gita broadly distinguishes four funda- 
mental types of individuals answ'ering to the four stages 
of the upward ascent. Basing caste on qualities, 9 the Gita 
requires each individual to do the duties imposed by his 


* xvi. 8, 42. 
« xiv. 19. 

7 iii. 21. 


• xiv. 5. 9 xviii. 23. 

5 iv. 24-27. 6 iv. 33. 

1 vi. 16-17. J iv. 13. 



THE THEISM OF THE BHAGAVADGlTA 571 


caste. 1 Svadharma is the work in agreement with the law 
of one’s being. We worship God by doing our ordained 
duties. 2 God intends every man for some work in connexion 
with society. The constitution of the social order is said 
to be divine. Plato supports an analogous doctrine. “ The 
ruler of the universe has ordered all things with a view to the 
excellence and preservation of the whole, and each part, as 
far as may be, has an action and passion appropriate to it 
. . . for every physician and every skilled artist does all things 
for the sake of the whole, directing this effort toward the 
common good, executing the part for the sake of the 
whole, and not the whole for the sake of the part.” 3 
Though originally framed on the basis of qualities, caste 
very soon became a matter of birth. It is hard to know who 
has which qualities. The only available test is birth. The 
confusion of birth and qualities has led to an undermining 
of the spiritual foundation of caste. There is no necessity 
why men of a particular birth should always possess the 
character expected of them. Since the facts of life do not 
answer to the logical ideal, the whole institution of caste 
is breaking down. While it is easy to condemn the system 
from our present-day knowledge, we have to recognise in 
fairness to it that it attempted to build a society on a basis 
of mutual goodwill and co-operation and remedy the dangers 
of a competitive view of society. It recognised the supremacy 
not of w'ealth, but of w’isdom, and its judgment of values 
is correct. 

The last of the four stages is that of sannyasa, where 
the individual is called upon to withdraw from life, t 
This stage, it is sometimes said, is to be entered on when 
the body is shrinking and the subject feels unfit for work. 5 
True sannyasa is the giving up of selfish desires, and this is 
possible even while we live as householders. 6 It is not 
right to say that, in the view of the Gita, we cannot attain 
moksa or freedom unless we resort to the last stage of 
sannyasa. 

Action performed in the spirit indicated by the Gita 

1 ii. 3i. > xviii. 46-47. 5 Laws, x. 903B. Jowett's version. 

< Mann, vi. 33-37; M.B., 6anti parva, 241. 15; 244. 3. 

5 Manu, vi. 2 ; M.B., Udyogaparva, 36. 39. ‘ B.G., v. 3. 

19 


VC I. x 



572 INDIAN PHILOSOPHY 

finds its completion in wisdom. 1 Egoism is eliminated and 
a sense of the divine is kindled. If we do the will we shall 
know of the doctrine. In that stage there is also a heart- 
felt devotion to the divine. Thus karma marga leads us to a 
condition where emotion, knowledge and will are all present. 

From our account it is clear that the path of service leads 
to moksa ; only it is not karma in the sense of the Purva 
Mimarhsa. Vedic sacrifices do not lead us to freedom. They 
have only an instrumental use. They prepare the mind for 
higher wisdom. But karma performed as a sacrifice to God, 
and in a spirit of disinterestedness and impersonality, is 
quite as efficacious as any other method, and there is no need 
to subordinate it to the method of wisdom as fsamkara does, 
or that of devotion as Ramanuja believes. In the interests 
of their own views, they make out that it was only to flatter 
Arjuna and coax him into action that Krsna declares 
the path of karma to be superior. 2 * We cannot suppose that 
Arjuna was called upon to act with a lie in his soul. Nor is 
he an ajnanin who has to work for the sake of purifying his 
mind and heart. It is not possible for us to look upon Janaka, 
Krsna and others as persons who indulge in works because 
they are men of imperfect wisdom. Nor is there need to 
think that after attaining wisdom there is no possibility for 
work. Janaka says that the true preaching was declared 
to him, which was to do karma, after killing selfish desires 
by wisdom. Even Samkara allows that after the attainment 
of wisdom some karmas are necessary to sustain the body. 3 
If some acts are allowed, it is only a question of degree how 
much the freed soul does. If the individual is afraid of 
becoming once again subject to karma, it means that his 
sense-control is not perfect.4 Even if we believe that as 
Brahman is different from the world, so is Atman from the 
body, there is nothing to prevent the body from performing 
acts. 5 The Gita, however, admits that men are of different 
temperaments, and some are inclined to withdrawal and 
others to service, and they will have to act according to 
the law of their own being. 6 

1 Chap. iv. » S.B.G., v. 2 ; vi 1-2 ; xviii. 11 ; R.B.G., v. 1 ; iii. 1. 

3 in. 8 . * xviii. 7; iii. 6. 5 iv. 21 ; v. 12. 

6 M.B_ Santiparva, 339-340. 



THE THEISM OF THE BHAGAVADGlTA 573 


Before we pass from this section it is necessary to note 
the views of the Gita on the question of human freedom. 
The will of man seems to be determined by past nature, 
heredity, training and environment. The whole world seems 
to converge in the nature of the individual. Except indirectly, 
the determination by nature cannot be called an ordinance 
of God. “ All existences follow their nature, and what shall 
coercing it avail ? ” 1 Human effort seems to be vain, 
since God in the centre of things seems to whirl all 
individuals " as if mounted on a machine.” 1 If the 
will determined by nature were all, there is no human 
freedom. The Buddhists declare that there is no self, 
but only karma acts. The Gita recognises a soul superior 
to the mechanically determined will. Whatever may be the 
truth of the ultimate state of the soul, when freed from 
bondage to nature, at the moral level it has a separate 
independent existence. The Gita believes in human freedom. 
Krsna, after describing the whole philosophy of life, asks 
Arjuna to “do as he chooses.” 3 There is no omnipotence 
of nature over the human soul. We are not obliged to follow 
the dictates of nature. We are actually warned against 
our likes and dislikes, which are “ the besetters of the soul in 
its path.” A distinction is made between what is inevitable 
in the make-up of nature which we cannot suppress and those 
wanderings and confusions which we can get rid of. Those 
beings whose souls have not struggled to the surface are driven 
by the current of nature. Human individuals in whom 
intelligence predominates check the process of nature. They 
refer all activities to the intelligent will. They do not lead 
unexamined animal lives, unless they are dominated by 
passion. “ What propels a man to sin, often seemingly 
against his will, and as if constrained by some secret force ? ” 
The answer is given that “ it is lust, which instigates him 
• • . it is the enemy of man on earth.” 4 It is possible for 
the individual to control his passion and regulate his conduct 
by reason. Samkara writes : “ As regards all sense-objects, 
such as sounds, there necessarily arises in each sense love 
for an agreeable object, and aversion to a disagreeable object. 

1 xviii. 59-60 ; see also iii. 33, 36. * xviii. 61. 

> Yathecchasi tatha kuru, xviii. 63. « iii. 37 ; vi 5-6. 



574 


INDIAN PHILOSOPHY 


Now I shall tell you where lies the scope for personal exertion 
and for the teaching of the sastras. He who would follow 
the teaching should at the very commencement rise above the 
sway of affection and aversion.” 1 Karma is only a condition 
and not a destiny. This follows even from the Gita analysis 
of the act where fate is only one of five factors. For the 
accomplishment of any act, five elements are necessary. 
They are adhisthana, or basis, some centre from which to 
work; kartr, or a doer; karana, or the instrumentation of 
nature ; cesta, or effort ; and daiva, or fate. This last is 
the power or powers other than human, the cosmic principle 
which stands behind modifying the work and disposing of 
its fruits in the shape of act and its reward. 


XII 

Moksa 

Whatever be the method we pursue, wisdom, love or 
service, the end reached is the same, union of the soul with 
the highest. When the mind is purified and egoism is 
destroyed, the individual becomes one with the supreme. 
If we start with the service of man, we end by becoming one 
with the supreme, not merely in work and consciousness, 
but in life and being. Love culminates in the ecstasy of 
devotion, where soul and God become one. Whatever route 
we approach by, we end in seeing, experiencing and living 
the divine life. This is the highest form of religion or life 
of spirit, called jnana in the wider sense of the term. 

Jnana as the method of attaining spiritual reality is 
distinct from jnana as the spiritual intuition, which is the 
ideal. Samkara correctly observes that moksa, or direct 
perception of God, is not an act of service or devotion, or for 
that matter cognition, however much it may be led up to 
by it. It is an experience or a direct insight into truth. 
It is to attain God that the different paths are tried. The 
Gita is not wholly consistent in its evaluation of the different 
routes to reality. “ Try to know Me. If you cannot 
contemplate Me, practise yoga. If you are not equal to 

* S.B.G., iii. 34. 



THE THEISM OF THE BHAGAVADGlTA 575 


this, try to serve Me by dedicating all your work to Me. 
If even this is found hard, do your duty regardless of conse- 
quences, giving up all desire for fruits.” 1 Again : “ Better 
indeed is wisdom than constant practice ; meditation is 
better than wisdom ; renouncing the fruit of action is better 
than meditation ; on renunciation follows peace.” * Each 
of the methods is preferred sometime or other. 3 In the mind 
of the author any method will do, and what the method is 
is left to the individual’s choice. “ Some by meditation, 
others by reflection, others by action, others by worship . . 
pass beyond death.” 4 

The supreme experience is freedom, and the word jnana 
is employed to refer to both the goal of the adventure as 
well as the path leading to it. On account of this confusion 
some have been led to think that jnana as a path is superior 
to the other methods of approach, and that cognition alone 
persists, while the other elements of emotion and will fall out 
in the supreme state of freedom. There does not seem to 
be any justification for such an opinion. 

Freedom or mok£a is unity with the supreme self. It 
is called by different names : mukti, or release ; brahmi sthiti 
being in Brahman, naiskarmya, or non-action ; nistraigunya, 
or the absence of the three qualities ; kaivalya, or solitary 
salvation ; brahmabhava, or the being of Brahman. In 
the absolute experience there is a feeling of the oneness 
of all. “ The Atman is in all beings, and all beings 
are in the Atman.” 5 The state of perfection exceeds 
the fruits of righteousness, resulting from the observance 
of Vedic rites, performances of sacrifices and all other 
methods. 6 

We have already said that different interpretations are 
given as to the place of work in the ultimate condition. 
The Gita is not clear on the point whether there is any basis 
of individuality in the ultimate state. The final condition is 
called siddhi, or perfection ; para siddhi, or supreme perfection ; 
paramgatim, or the supreme goal ; "padamanamayam,” or the 
blissful seat ; santi, or quietude ; “ £a£vatam padam avyayam,” 


* xii. 9-i i. 

J vi. 46 ; vii. 16 ; xii. 12. 
I vi. 29. 


• xii. 12. 

4 xiii. 24-25 ; xviii 54-56. 

* viii. 28. 



576 INDIAN PHILOSOPHY 

the eternal indestructible abode . 1 These expressions are 
colourless, and do not tell us whether there is a continuance of 
individuality in the state of freedom. There are texts which 
assert that the released are not troubled about the concerns 
of the world. They have no individuality, and therefore 
no basis for action. Duality disappears and work becomes 
impossible. The freed man has no qualities. He becomes 
one with the eternal self . 2 If prakrti acts, and if the eternal 
is independent of the modes of prakrti’s workings, then in 
the state of moksa there is no ego, no will, no desire. It 
is a condition beyond all modes and qualities, impassive, 
free and at peace. It is not mere survival of death, but 
the attaining of the supreme state of being, where the spirit 
knows itself to be superior to birth and death, infinite, 
eternal, and unconditioned by manifestations. Samkara 
takes his stand on these passages and interprets the freedom 
of the Gita in the sense of the kaiyalya of the Samkyhas. 
If we have a body clinging to us, nature will go on acting till 
the body is shaken off as a discarded shell. The impersonal 
spirit is detached from the workings of the body. Even 
Samkara recognises that there will be life and action so long 
as there is the body. We cannot escape from the instru- 
mentalism of nature. The Jivanmukta, or the freed soul, 
possessing the body, reacts to the events of the outer world, 
though he does not get entangled in them. There is no 
suggestion of the transformation of the whole nature into the 
immortal dharma, the law of the infinite power of the divine. 
Spirit and body are an unreconciled duality, and the spirit can 
attain its perfection only when the sense of the reality of the 
body is shaken off. On this view we cannot think of the action 
of the highest Brahman, since the basis of all activity, the 
unstable formation in the bosom of the infinite, the temporary 
phenomenon is dissolved. A perfect relinquishment of our 
point of view seems to be the end of all progress. Samkara is 
emphatic that our view of the infinite is not its true measure. 
The fullness of its life cannot be comprehended by us from our 

i xii. io ; xvi. 23 ; xiv. 1 ; vi 45 ; viii. 13 ; ix. 32 ; xvi 22-23 ; ii. 
51 ; iv. 39 ; v. 12 ; xvni. 62 ; xvni 56. 

» Atmaiva, vii. 18. He obtains my nature, madbhavam yati, viii. 5 ; 
see also viii. 7. 



THE THEISM OF THE BHAGAVADGlTA 577 


human standpoint. Adopting this view, he urges that those 
verses of the Gita which imply the plurality of spirits do not 
refer to the ultimate state, but only to relative conditions. 

We have other verses which suggest that action is possible 
even for the freed souls. The men of insight and wisdom 
imitate the supreme Lord and act in the world. 1 The highest 
condition is not a laya or a disappearance in the supreme, 
but one of individuality. The freed spirit, though centred 
in impersonality, possesses its own individuality as a part 
of the divine soul. Even as Purusottama, who has the whole 
universe suffused through His being, acts, the liberated 
individuals should act. The highest state is one of dwelling 
in Purusottama. 2 * * Those who have attained it are freed 
from rebirth and attain to the status of God .3 Release 
is not obliteration of individuality for all eternity, 
but a state of blissful freedom of the soul with a distinct 
existence in the presence of God. “ My devotees come 
to me.” 4 The author of the Gita seems to believe in a 
continuance of conscious individuality even in freedom. As 
a matter of fact, some passages suggest that the freed do not 
become God, but only attain sameness of essence with God . 5 
Freedom is not pure identity, but only qualitative sameness, 
an elevation of the soul to God-like existence, where petty 
desires have no power to move. To be immortal is to live 
in the eternal light. We do not cease to be selves, but 
deepen our selfhood, efface all stains of sin, cut asunder the 
knot of doubt, master ourselves, and are ever engaged in doing 
good to all creatures. We do not free ourselves from all 
qualities, but possess the sattva quality and suppress the 
rajas. 6 Ramanuja insists on this view, and makes out that 
the freed soul is in constant union (nityayukta) with God, 
and his whole life and being reveal it. Knowledge streams 
from the light in which he lives, and in his love for God he 
is practically lost. We seem to possess here a supreme 
existence attained not by a total exclusion of nature, but 
by a higher spiritual fulfilment of it. On this view we act 

1 iv. 14-15. * Nivasisyasi mayyeva. 

3 xviii. 21 ; iv. 10. Madbhfivam agatah. 

♦ vii. 23 ; see also ix. 25 ; iv. 9. 

5 xiv. 2. Mama sadharmyam agatah. L ^aiitarajasam, vi. 27 



578 INDIAN PHILOSOPHY 

and live in God ; only the centre of activity shifts from the 
human self to the divine. The divine energy is felt to be 
pulsating through the whole world, taking different forms 
in different things. Each soul has its centre and circum- 
ference in God. The view of Ramanuja holds to the truth 
of spiritual personality as a factor even in the highest 
experience. 

There are then two conflicting views in the Gita about the 
ultimate state, one which makes the freed soul lose itself in 
the impersonality of Brahman and attain a peace beyond the 
strife of the world, and the other where we possess and enjoy 
God, being lifted above all suffering and pain and the eagerness 
of petty desires, which are the badges of subjection. The 
Gita being a religious work insists on the ultimateness of 
a personal God, and calls for a full flowering of the divine in 
man to its utmost capacity of wisdom and power, love and 
universality. From this we cannot, however, conclude that 
the Gita view is opposed to that of the Upani§ads. The 
controversy is only a particular application of the general 
problem whether the absolute Brahman or the personal 
Purusottama is the highest reality. In the discussion of 
Gita metaphysics we have said that the Gita does not repudiate 
the ultimate reality of the absolute Brahman, but it suggests 
that from our point of view this absolute reveals itself as the 
personal Lord. There is no other way for thought, human 
and limited as it is, to envisage the highest reality. Adopting 
the same standpoint, we may say that the two views of the 
ultimate state of freedom are the intuitional and the 
intellectual ways of representing the one condition. From 
our human standpoint the absolute seems to be a passive, 
relationless identity, making all action impossible while it 
is not really so. It we want to give positive descriptions of 
it, then Ramanuja’s account is the only available one. To 
make out that the two, the absolute and the personal God, 
are one, the Gita says that in the highest reality impersonality 
and personality are combined in a manner that is incompre- 
hensible to us. Even so the freed spirits may have no indi- 
viduality, and yet have one by self-limitation. It is in this 
way that the Gita harmonises the ever immobile quietism of 
the timeless self with the eternal play of the energy of nature. 



THE THEISM OF THE BHAGAVADGlTA 579 

Whatever the truth be regarding the state of the freed 
after death, so long as he continues to live in the world, he 
is committed to some action or other. Samkara sees in his 
activity the modes of nature’s working, and Ramanuja the 
actions of the supreme. These are two different ways of 
expressing the impersonality of action. His work is done 
in a freedom of the soul and with an inner j oy and peace which 
does not depend on externals for its source or continuance. 
The freed souls throw off the listlessness of scepticism. All 
darkness is dispelled from their countenances. They show 
in their animated looks and firm voice that they have the 
vitality of a spiritual persuasion which they do not and cannot 
distrust. They are not subject to the dominion of flesh or 
attraction of desire. They are not cast down in adversity 
or elated in prosperity. They are strangers to anxiety, fear 
and anger. They possess an easy mind and the unspoiled 
virgin outlook of a child . 1 

The freed soul is beyond all good and evil. Virtue is 
transcended in perfection. The mukta rises above any mere 
ethical rule of living to the light, largeness and power of 
spiritual life. Even if he should have committed any evh 
acts which would in ordinary circumstances necessitate 
another birth on earth, no such thing is necessary. He is 
freed from ordinary rules and regulations. Absolute indi- 
vidualism is the view of the Gita so far as the end is 
concerned. It would be a dangerous doctrine if these freed 
men should imitate Nietzsche’s super-man, who has no 
patience with the weak and the unfit, the defective and 
the delinquent. Though they are freed from social obliga- 
tions, the free spirits of the Gita freely approve of them. 
The liberated do not suffer any vexation in themselves or 
cause vexation to others . 2 It is their second nature to werk 
for the welfare of the world. These noble souls regard with 
equal mind all things of the earth. They stand for a 
dynamic creative spiritual life, and see to it that the social 
regulations tend to the fuller spiritual unfolding or expres- 
sion of human life. They do their appointed work, niyatam 
karma, ordained by the divine will which works in them. 

1 Cf. Balabhavas tatha bhavo niicinto yoga ucyate. Jfianasariikalini 

Tantra. * xii. 15. 


VCI.. I 


19 * 



580 INDIAN PHILOSOPHY 

While the Gita insists much on social duties, it recognises 
a supra-social state. It believes in the infinite destiny of 
the individual apart from human society. The sannyasin 
is above all rules, caste and society. This symbolises the 
infinite dignity of man, who can strip himself of all externals, 
even wife and children, and be self-sufficient in the solitude 
of the desert if he has his God with him. It is not an 
ascetic ideal that the sannyasin adopts. He may be aloof 
from society, yet he has compassion for all. Mahadeva, 
the ideal ascetic, seated in the Himalayan snows, readily 
drinks poison for the saving of humanity. 

REFERENCES 

Telang : Bhagavadglta. S.B.E., vol. viii. 

Tilak : GItarahasya. 

Aukobindo Ghosh : Essays on the Gita. 



CHAPTER X 


BUDDHISM AS A RELIGION 


The history of Buddhism after the death of Buddha — Asoka — The 
Mahayana and the HInayana — Northern and southern Buddhism — 
Literature — HInayana doctrines — Metaphysics, ethics and religion — 
The rise of the Mahayana — Its monistic metaphysics — The religion 
of the Mahayana — Its resemblance to the Bhagavadgita — The 
ethics of the Mahayana — The ten stages — HInayana and Maha- 
yana ethics compared — Nirvana — Decline of Buddhism — The effects 
of Buddhism on Indian thought. 


I 

Sects of Buddhism 

Even in the lifetime of Buddha there were tendencies to 
schism among his followers, 1 though they did not develop 
on account of the magnetic personality of the founder. 
After his death they became emphasised. The Hlnayanists 
believe that the Theravada is identical with the three pitakas 
as now existing in Ceylon and compiled at the first council 
at Rajagrha. This first council tried, against much opposi- 
tion, to relax the rigours of asceticism and make some soften- 
ing changes in the rules. A second council took place at 
Vaisali about a hundred years after the first one. It con- 
sidered the theory and practices of the Vinaya, or the rules 
of the order, and debated whether any indulgences should 
be allowed or not. After a severe struggle, the more orthodox 
party, Sthaviras, 2 or the elders, succeeded in condemning 
the indulgences. The progressive party, or the Mahasanghikas. 
which was defeated, had large numbers to support them. 
They held a council called the Mahasangiti, or the great 
council. We have the story of this great council, from 

’ Witness the attempts of Devadatta. * Pali Theras. 

681 



582 INDIAN PHILOSOPHY 

the orthodox point of view, described in Dipavamsa. 1 2 3 
It is said to have overturned religion and “ broken up the 
old scriptures,” “ distorted the sayings and doctrines of 
the Nikayas,” and “ destroyed the spirit of Buddha’s teach- 
ing.” The main point of difference between the orthodox 
and the progressive sections seems to have been on the 
question of the attainment of Buddhahood. The Sthaviras 
held that it was a quality to be acquired by a strict observance 
of the rules of the Vinaya. The progressives maintained 
that Buddhahood was a quality inborn in every human 
being, and by adequate development it was capable of raising 
its possessor to the rank of a tathagata. The Sthaviravada, 
or the orthodox view, is said to be the lineal ancestor of 
Ceylonese Buddhism. Buddhism even in the second century 
of its existence had broken up into eighteen sects, all of them 
claiming to be the original faith. We do not know further 
details of the course of Buddhism till Anoka’s time. 1 When 
Asoka, the Mauryan emperor, adopted Buddhism two centuries 
and a half after Buddha’s death, there was a vigorous expan- 
sion of Buddhism. What was only a local sect of Hinduism 
for nearly three centuries after the death of Buddha became 
largely through the endeavours of A£oka a world religion. 3 
All over his vast empire, which extended from the valley of 
Kabul to the mouths of the Ganges and from the Himalayas 
to the south of the Vindhya mountains, he gave orders 
that his edicts should be engraven on stone pillars, so that 
they might abide for ever. He sent missionaries to all parts 
of India, from Kashmir to Ceylon, even to countries not 
under his sway. The thirteenth edict states that he sent 
missionaries to Antiochus II of Syria, Ptolemy II of Egypt, 
Antigonos Gonatos of Macedonia, Magas of Cyrene and 
Alexander II of Epirus. In the third century b.c. Buddhism 
entered Kashmir and Ceylon, and penetrated slowly into 
Nepal and Tibet, China, Japan and Mongolia. Asoka’s son 
Mahendra, it is said, was made the head of the Buddhist 

1 5 - 

2 “ Wc know, whether from native or foreign sources, very little of 
what happen. (1 during the century and half that followed after the Buddha’s 
death.” Rhys Davids ■ Buddhist India, p. 259. 

3 See V. Smith. Asoka, p. 22, 



BUDDHISM AS A RELIGION 583 

church of Ceylon. In view of the tendency for new practices 
to creep into the Buddhist religion, Asoka emphasised the 
moral side of Buddhism. 1 The increased respect paid to the 
order already attracted many men of doubtful views into 
it, and as the Mahavamsa says, “ heretics assumed the yellow 
robe in order to share in its advantages ; whenever they 
had opinions of their own they gave them forth as 
doctrines of the Buddha, they acted according to their 
own will, and not according to what was right.” 2 A 
third council met at Pataliputra 3 under the presidentship 
of Tissa, son of Moggali, with the object of purifying the 
doctrine. 

The new rulers of India, the Yavanas, the Sakas, the 
Ksatrapas, the Satavahanas, the Pahlavas and the Kusanas, 
many of whom were of foreign nationality, readily adopted 
the Buddhist religion. Though Brahminism had its repre- 
sentatives in the South and the West, yet the great majority 
were Buddhistic. Under the Guptas, who came to power in 
the first century a.d. (319 a.d. ?), Brahmanism revived. 
We read of Samudragupta’s ASvamedha sacrifice in the 
inscriptions of Candragupta at Madhura and Skandagupta 
in Behar. We have also many other monuments of 
Brahmanic revival. The sectarian worship of Siva and 
Visnu becomes popular. Subandhu in his Vasavadatta 
telis us that Buddhist doctrines were attacked by the 
followers of Jaimini.4 Prakrit, the chief language of 
the Buddhists, yielded to Sanskrit, as is evident from the 
Buddhist Sanskrit inscriptions of the era. Buddhism 
imitated Brahmanism in making a god of Buddha. Images 
of Buddha were set up, devotion to a personal being 
developed, and Nagarjuna, a contemporary of Kaniska, 
gave a distinct form to this type of Buddhism, called the 
Mahayana, though it was shaping itself even before his time. 
Mahayanism seems to be the culmination of the movement 

' Asoka mentions in one of his inscriptions that he caused a stupa 
(memorial building) of Kanakamuni to be put up for a second time. It is 
obvious that people had already taken to building stupas, making pilgrimages, 
etc. The fact that Kanakamuni was looked upon as a past Buddha shows 
that even then there was the belief in the series of Buddhas. 

1 38—39. 3 2 5 2 B - c> 

1 ivecij Jaiminimatanusarina iva tathagatamatadhvarii'irr.h. 



584 INDIAN PHILOSOPHY 

which led to the secession of the Mahasamghikas from the 
Theravadins. The decline of early Buddhism, the rise of 
Mahayanism and the revival of Brahmanism all synchronised. 
The Mahayana follows the canon drawn up by the council in 
Kaniska’s time, held at Jalandhara in the Punjab The 
original doctrine was much enlarged, new material was added, 
and a good deal of popular magic and superstition was incor- 
porated with it. Of course, it is the younger branch with Sans- 
krit, while the Hinayana is the older, with Pali as its language. 
The latter claims to represent the teaching of Gautama 
in its original form, and to preserve the rationalistic, monastic, 
and puritanic elements of his teaching. The Mahayana 
develops the doctrine in a mystical, theological and devotional 
way. The Hinayana has maintained its supremacy in Ceylon 
and Burma, the Mahayana in Nepal and China. A sharp 
opposition between the inwardness of the Hinayana, which 
withdraws from the visible world, and the adaptation to 
the world conditions characteristic of the Mahayana, runs 
throughout the subsequent history of the Buddhist religion. 
The latter is the great way meant for all, while the Hinayana 
is the little way fit only for a select few. In the South, 
where the Hinayana was the ruling faith, Kaniska’s council 
is not acknowledged. Hinayana Buddhism was called 
Southern Buddhism, since it prevailed in southern countries 
like Ceylon, while Mahayana is called the Northern, since 
it flourished in the North, Tibet, Mongolia, China, Korea 
and Japan. But this division seems to be an artificial one. 
Rhys Davids observes : “ There is not now, and never has 
been, any unity either of opinion or of language in what is 
called Northern or in what is called Southern Buddhism .” 1 
When we realise that almost all Buddhist canonical literature, 
wherever it might have extended, arose in the North of 
India, and recognise that the two are not separate compart- 
ments, but possess traces of mutual influence, we see that 
it is not necessary to call one northern and the other 
southern. It is clear, however, that the distinction between 
the Hinayana and the Mahayana was current even before the 
fourth century a.d. Fahian and Yuan Chwang mention 
the Hinayana, and it also occurs in the Lalitavistara. 

' Buddhist India, p. 173. 



BUDDHISM AS A RELIGION 


585 


The Hinayana bases itself on the Tali canon, while many 
of the Sanskrit works of Buddhism belong to the Mahayana. 
The Mahayana Buddhism posseses no canon, since it does 
not represent any homogeneous sect. 1 


1 The most important works of the school are the following nine : 
(i) Astasahasrikaprajnaparamita, (2) Gandavyuha, (3) Daiabhumlsvara, 
(4) Samadhiraja, (5) Laffkavatara, (6) Saddharmapundarlka, (7) Tatha- 
gataguhyaka, (8) Lalitavistara, (9) Suvarnaprabhasa. The Prajnaparamita 
(a.d. 200) deals with the six perfections of a Bodhisattva, especially 
with the highest prajfia or wisdom, the knowledge of the doctrine of 
Sunya. An abridged edition of it, attributed to Nagarjuna, is the Maha- 
yana Sutras, from which Nagarjuna derives his own Madhyamika Sutras. 
The Gandavyuha celebrates the Bodhisattva ManjusrI, and teaches the 
doctrines of sunyata, dharmakaya and the redemption of the world by 
bodhisattvas. The Dasabhumisvara (a.d. 400) details the ten stages by 
which Buddhahood is reached. Samadhiraja, or the king of meditations, is 
a dialogue describing the various stages of contemplation through which a 
bodhisattva can attain the highest enlightenment. The Lahkavatara 
Sutra (a.d. 400) describes the Yogacara views. The Saddharma-Pundarlka, 
or the lotus of the law (a.d. 250), makes Buddha a god above gods, an im- 
measurably exalted being who has lived for countless ages and will live for 
ever. According to it every man can become a Buddha who has heard his 
preaching and performed meritorious acts. Even those who adore relics 
and erect stupas attain the highest enlightenment. Lalitavistara, as its 
title signifies, gives a detailed account of the sport of Buddha. It looks upon 
the life-work of Buddha as a diversion of the supreme being. Edwin Arnold’s 
Light of Asia is based on it. The contents of Suvarnaprabhasa are partly 
philosophical and partly legendary. It deals also with tantra ritual. The 
two Sukhavatlvyuhas, as well as the Amitayurdhyana Sutra, Vajracchedika, 
or the Diamond Cutter, are popular in Japan. The Sukhavativyuha (a.d. 100) 
contains a detailed account of the land of bliss and praises Amitabha. 
Karandavyuha, akin to the later Hindu Puranas, is devoted to the exaltation 
of Avalokitesvara, the Lord who looks down with compassion on all things, 
the typical bodhisattva, who in the exercise of infinite pity refuses Buddha- 
hood till all beings are saved. The yearning for universal salvation is power- 
fully expressed in it. Mahavastu, the book of great events, is called a Hinayana 
work, and belongs to the heretical sect of the Lokottaravadins, %vho regard 
Buddha as a supernatural being. It contains many Mahayanist doctrines, 
such as an enumeration of the ten states of a bodhisattva, hymns to Buddha, 
emphasis on the worship of Buddha as a means to salvation. Asvaghosa’s 
Buddhacarita (first century a.d.), is one of the chief classics of Mahayana 
Buddhism. This author’s works include Saundarananda kavya, which 
deals with the conversion of Nanda, half-brother of Buddha. Vajrasuci, or 
the Diamond Needle, is also attributed to him. Arya^ura is a poet of 
Asvaghosa’s school (fourth century a.d .) . He composed a famous J atakamala, 
or garland of jatakas. Ssantideva’s §iksasamuccaya (seventh century) is a 
manual of Mahayana teaching. Bodhicaryavatara is a religious poem of great 
merit. For a detailed account of these Mahayana works see Nariman : Literary 
History of Sanskrit Buddhism, and Rajendral Lai Mitra : Nepalese Buddhist 
Literature. The dates here given are only probable. 



586 


INDIAN PHILOSOPHY 


II 

HInayana Buddhism 

The HInayana Buddhism is a logical development of 
the principles of the canonical works. The unsystematic 
views expressed in them and discernible in Milinda are later 
developed into the system embodied in the Abhidharmas of 
the Vaibhasikas (the Sarvastivadins) and the works of 
Buddhaghosa and Abhidharmasamgraha. According to the 
HInayana Buddhism all things are momentary. 1 The 
so-called permanent entities, space and nirvana, do not 
exist. They are names of negations. All being consists of 
momentary entities called dharmas. There is no thinker, 
but only thoughts ; no feeler, but only feelings. It is a pure 
phenomenalism maintaining the non-existence of substances 
or individuals. 2 It believes in the absolute existence of 
dharmas, small and brief realities which, grouped as cause 
and effect, create the pseudo-individuals. 

The goal of existence is the attainment of nirvana or 
cessation of consciousness. All consciousness is a feeling 
for something, and therefore bondage. 3 There is no specula- 
tion in the HInayana about what remains after nirvana. 

The arhat ideal is the distinguishing-mark of the HInayana, 
which believes in the possibility of emancipation through 
one’s own powers. The method is contemplation and 
meditation 4 on the four truths. The HInayana Buddhism 
is indefinite about the Buddhahood of those who reach 
arhata, nor does it suggest that every creature may attain 
Buddhahood. We cannot help feeling that the ideal of the 
arhat, the perfect egoist, who is useless to others, is untrue 
to the real personality of Buddha, the man of pity and 
compassion, though the dependence on the saviour Buddha 
of the Mahayana faith is also untrue to the teaching of the 
original Buddha, however useful it may be. The HInayana 
ideal may be justly summed up in the statement of Ibsen : 
“ There are actually moments when the whole history of 


' Yat sat tat ksanikam. 
nv.B.T, p. 162. 


1 Pudgalanairatmya. 

4 Dariana and bhavana. 



BUDDHISM AS A RELIGION 587 

the world appears to me like one great shipwreck, and the 
only important thing seems to be to save oneself.” 

The arhata is the highest condition, the state of sainthood, 
when the fire of passion is extinguished, where there is no 
more karma to bind us to rebirth. Buddha is said to 
have attained this state at the beginning of his ministry. 
The attainment of nirvana on earth by self-control does not 
require the aid of any supernatural power. The greatest of 
all beings, Buddha himself, is to be revered simply because of 
the example and the teaching he has left us and for nothing 
more. The Hinayanists try to achieve the goal in the solitude 
of their cells, segregated from the common life of men. In 
the Khaggavisana Sutta family life and social intercourse 
are strictly prohibited. “ To him who leads a social life 
affections arise and the pain which follows affection .” 1 
The followers of the Hinayana are called upon to shut their 
eyes as they pass along the highways of the world, lest their 
sight should rest on any outward beauty. A wise man “ should 
avoid married life as if it were a burning pit of live-coals ” 

In friendship of the world anxiety is born, 

In household life distraction’s dust springs up. 

The state set free from home and friendship’s ties 
That, and that only, is the recluse’s aim. 1 

He who wants to attain nirvana according to 
Visuddhimagga should resort to the cremation ground, which 
is a school of many exquisite virtues, and imparts to us the 
lesson that the world and the self are unreal. We cannot 
reach our goal by means of a life of love and activity. The 
lack of warmth and passionlessness of the arhat ideal are 
not inspiring. It may well be that in those days of loosely 
knit social life, these beliefs had a great value. But the 
world cannot become a monastery. We cannot have a 
compulsory conscription of men, women and children into 
cloisters. Disgust of life does not represent all that is 
substantial in the life of man. True asceticism is not 
indifference to the suffering of the world, but the building 

■ ii. 

* Muni Sutta of Sutta Nipata, i. 12; quoted in Milinda, iv. 5. 1. 



588 INDIAN PHILOSOPHY 

up of a silent centre even in the furious activity of life. 
We must be spiritual enough to possess our souls in the 
noise of the blatant world, and not merely in the peace and 
silence of an anchorite’s apartment. Early Buddhism, 
unlike the Hinayana, required us to look for our opportunities 
in the retreats of misery and the haunts of pain, the clamour 
of the crowd and the tumult of traffic. 

The Hinayana developed an anthropomorphic conception, 
based on the popular polytheism, and believed in one supreme 
Creator and many subordinate deities. These gods were 
neither omnipotent nor omniscient. They were introduced 
simply because meditation is an essential stage of discipline. 
The historical Buddha was glorified, even deified, and thus 
the need for an object of reverence was met. The gods are 
said to have paid their homage at his birth and death. 
Buddha is the God over gods, devatideva, supreme in know- 
ledge and power, and yet there is no defined relation of the 
worshipper and the worshipped. Strictly speaking, Buddha 
is only a preacher, a guide to truth. He is neither divine 
nor supernatural. He is different from other saints who 
have also attained bodhi, for he not only discovered the 
truths of salvation, but also declared them to the world. 
In the orthodox Hinayana, Buddha was but a man like 
other men, only with greater genius and power of intuition. 
Worship of Buddha is merely an act of commemoration. 
Some conservative followers of this religion held that we 
could imitate Buddha, though we are not qualified for his 
perfection . 1 They cherished the hope of being born in the 
good resort of the heavenly worlds and finishing their journey 
on the way of bodhi at some future time. The Hinayana 
seems to have practically ignored Gautama’s advice regarding 
speculation about the unseen. Admitting first Buddha, 
then the munis entering on the path leading to Buddhahood, 
and then the Hindu deities, the Hinayana became practically 
a polytheism. Philosophical phenomenalism and religious 
polytheism with monarchical tendencies are what we have 
here. The Hinayana is a colourless religion denying 

» One section of the HInayanists called theLokottaravadins makes Buddha 
a superhuman being, lokottara, who comes down to the world to save man- 
kind for a short time. 



BUDDHISM AS A RELIGION 


589 


God in doctrine, though allowing worship of Buddha in 
practice. There is no devotion or bhakti, which implies 
a living God. 

The HInayana Buddhism is not merely a way to nirvana, 
but also teaches us the way to rebirth into the world of Brahma 
by the grace and help of holy saints. Heaven and hell are 
accepted. The view is an expression of weariness or disgust 
with the endless strife of becoming, of the relief found in 
mere ceasing from effort. It is not a healthy-minded doctrine. 
A sort of world hatred is its inspiring motive. It prefers 
negative and philosophically strict definitions, while the 
Mahayana aims at positive and religious expressions. The 
former represents more faithfully the historical traditions of 
Buddha, while the latter aspires to please the masses by 
promising to fulfil the needs of the heart. By its abstract and 
negative tendencies the HInayana became the incarnation 
of dead thought and the imprisonment of spirit. It gives 
us neither a warm faith for which to live nor a real ideal for 
which to work. 


Ill 

The Mahayana 

If the doctrines belonging to the period between the rise 
of Buddhism and the time of Asoka perhaps represent early 
Buddhism, the views that prevailed in the time of Asoka 
may be said to be the HInayana doctrine. The tendencies 
that developed during the period from A£oka to Kaniska 
and became explicit thereafter form the Mahayana Buddhism. 
A cold, passionless metaphysics devoid of religious teaching 
could not long inspire enthusiasm and joy. The HInayana 
ignored the groping of the spirit of man after something higher 
and wronged the spiritual side of man. The philosophical 
atheism of the HInayana is the skeleton in the box, the diseased 
worm in the beautiful flower. The wronged sides of human 
nature asserted their rights and rebelled against the cold 
understanding with an imperious violence which was as 
tyrannical and exclusive as that of the understanding had 
been. The famishing soul and the thirsting fancy sought 



590 INDIAN PHILOSOPHY 

to derive nourishment from the suggestive symbolism 
of the prevailing religion. The life of Buddha could arouse 
emotion. Naturally Buddha was made a god. He was 
the realisation of the moral idea, the law personified. 
The metaphysically minded Hinayanist, out of loyalty to 
the teaching of Buddha, might have hesitated, torn off the 
thin disguise for despair, and looked upon Buddha as no 
more than human. But a faith which failed to quicken 
the flame of devotion had either to undergo modification or 
perish. 

In ethics the monastic tendency with all its conse- 
quences of detachment from the world’s affairs, the morbid 
suppression of all human interests and pleasures, the impos- 
sible extinction of natural life proved unsatisfying to human 
nature. Man is bound to the world he tries to escape from. 
If freedom from servitude to the not-self means the extinc- 
tion of self, then death is our goal. Buddha meant by free- 
dom triumph over not-self, but not its destruction. The 
Mahayanists contend that Buddha is no preacher of penance. 
He does not shut his eyes to the world when he attains nirvana, 
but offers light to it that it may reach its goal. “ I 
would be a guard to them that have no protection, a guide 
unto the traveller, a ship, a well spring, a bridge, for the 
seekers of that shore ; I would be a lamp to such as need a 
lamp, a bed for the weary that need a bed, the very slave of 
such as need service.” 1 In the Hinayana, nirvana became 
negatively interpreted as extinction of all being. It is 
not possible for ordinary man to fall in love with 
annihilation. 

The negative philosophy of the Hinayana could not be- 
come a popular religion. When Buddhism became universal 
in spirit and embraced large masses, the Hinayana could 
not serve. A religion more catholic than the Hinayana, a 
less ascetic ideal was required. When Buddhism spread 
throughout India and even beyond it, it ceased to set itself 
up in opposition to the prevailing religions, but insinuated 
itself slowly into other forms. In the formative stages of 
the Mahayana Buddhism there were successive movements 
of the nomadic tribes from outside into the country. Hordes 
1 Bodhicaryavatara. 



BUDDHISM AS A RELIGION 591 

of half-civilised tribes captured parts of the Punjab and 
Kashmir . 1 Many of the aliens adopted the religion and 
language, culture and civilisation of the Buddhist peoples 
whom they conquered. Kaniska, the most powerful of 
the princes, himself became a Buddhist. The centre of 
power moved from the East to the West. Pali gave place 
to Sanskrit. The uncivilised soaked in superstitious practices 
did not embrace Buddhism without transforming it. They 
reduced the higher religion to the level of their understanding. 
Though there were doctrinal differences between the Mahayana 
Buddhism and the Brahmanical views, still the complexion 
it assumed for its followers was nothing new or unheard of 
in the times. The Mahayana found that it could capture 
the peoples’ minds only if it gave up the icy coldness of 
some forms of early Buddhism and framed a religion which 
could appeal to the human heart. It imitated the successful 
experiments of Hinduism embodied in the theism of the 
Yoga, of the later Upanisads and of the Bhagavadgita. 

The Mahayana Buddhism gives us positive ideas of 
God, soul and human destiny. “ The Mahayana, or Great 
Vessel, is so called by its adherents in contradistinction to 
the Hinayana, or little vessel, of primitive Buddhism ; the 
former offers to all beings in all worlds salvation by faith and 
love as well as by knowledge, while the latter only avails 
to convey over the rough sea of becoming, to the farther 
shore of nibbana those few strong souls who require no 
external spiritual aid nor the consolation of worship. The 
Hinayana, like the ‘ unshown way ’ of those who seek the 
‘ Nirguna Brahman,’ is exceeding hard ; whereas the 
burden of the Mahayana is light, and does not require that 
a man should immediately renounce the world and all the 
affections of humanity. The manifestation of the body 
of the Law, says the Mahayana, is adapted to the various 
needs of the children of the Buddha ; whereas the Hinayana 
is only of avail to those who have left their spiritual childhood 
far behind them. The Hinayana emphasises the necessity 

1 It is still a question whether Buddhism entered China in its older form 
of the Hinayana or the younger form of the Mahayana, but however this 
may be, the Mahayana soon grew predominant, and has been in the ascendant 
till to-day. 



592 


INDIAN PHILOSOPHY 


of saving knowledge, and aims at the salvation of the indh 
vidual, and refuses to develop the mystery of nibbana in 
a positive sense ; the Mahayana lays as much or greater 
stress on love, and aims at the salvation of every sentient 
being, and finds in nirvana the One Reality, which is ‘ void ’ 
only in the sense that it is free from the limitations of 
every phase of the limited or contingent experience of which 
we have empirical knowledge.” 1 The Hinayana protests 
against the Mahayana as an accommodation of the pure 
teaching to the necessities of human nature. Anyway, 
while it stands as an example to the world of realising the 
highest through knowledge, the Mahayana requires us to 
take part in the world, evolving new social and religious 
ideals. The absence of the supernatural and the consequent 
lack of any scope for imagination, the morbid way of solving 
the central problems of life, the reduction of nirvana to 
extinction and ethical life to a monastic asceticism, made 
the Hinayana a religion for the thinking and the strong 
in spirit, while a new development had to arise for the 
emotional and the worshipful. 


IV 

The Mahayana Metaphysics 

We shall notice here the general philosophical principles 
of the Mahayana, postponing to a later section a detailed 
discussion of its two important schools, the Sunyavada, 
which holds that all is void, and the Vijnanavada, which 
declares that nothing exists except in consciousness. While 
the Hinayana looks upon the soul as a complex of transitory 
elements or skandhas, the Mahayana holds that even these 
elements are not real. This does not mean that there is 
nothing real. A metaphysical substratum is admitted. 
This reality in its ontological aspect is called Bhutatathata, 
or the essence of existence. In its religious aspect it is 
called Dharmakaya. It is the highest principle which har- 
monises all contradictions. It is also called Nirvana, since 


* A. Coomaraswamy : Buddha and the Gospel of Buddhism , pp. 236-227 



BUDDHISM AS A RELIGION 


593 


it brings absolute peace to the torn heart. It is Bodhi, or 
wisdom. It directs the course of the world and gives shape 
to all. Mahayana metaphysics is monistic in character. 
All objects in the world are of one reality. The nature of 
this reality is beyond language and description. “ Things 
in their fundamental nature cannot be named or explained. 
They cannot be adequately expressed in any form of language. 
They are bejmnd the range of perception, and have no 
distinctive features. They possess absolute sameness, and 
are subject neither to transformation nor to destruction. 
They are nothing else but one soul, for which tathata 
is another designation.” 1 “ There is then neither that 
which speaks nor that which is spoken of ; neither that which 
thinks nor that which is thought ; when you conform to 
tathata and when your subjectivity is completely obliterated, 
it is then that you will be said to have insight.” 3 The 
absolute is free from relativity, individuality and conditioned- 
ness, though it is the self-existent and the source of all. It 
is “ the effulgence of great wisdom ; the universal illumina- 
tion of the dharmadhatu (universe), the true and adequate 
knowledge, the mind pure and clean in its nature ; the eternal, 
the blessed, the self-regulating and the pure, the immutable 
and the free. ”3 

The world of experience is phenomenal and not real. 
It is compared to a dream, though it is not without meaning. 
The Mahayana Buddhists liken the universe to a maya, 
mirage, flash of lightning or froth. 4 All things of the world 
have the three aspects of (i) quintessence, (2) attributes, and 
(3) activities. If we take a jar, its quintessence is the 
earth, its attribute is the form of the jar, and its activity 
is to keep water. The attribute and activity are subject 
to law of birth and death, while the quintessence is indes- 
tructible. The waves of the ocean may be high or low, but 
the water itself neither increases nor decreases. The whole 
universe has its unchanged aspect as well as its changeable 
one. Bhutatathata is the former, the absolute which 
persists throughout all space and time as the basis of all. 
This universal eternal substratum answers to the Brahman of 

1 Suzuki ’s version of : The Awakening of Faith , p. 56. 

* Ibid., p, 58. J Ibid., p. 96. 4 LahtaviHa+a. 



594 


INDIAN PHILOSOPHY 


the Upanisads. 1 In the realm of absolute truth or paramartha 
we have nothing else. But in the region of relative truth 
or samvrti we have the one made many by name and form. 
The absolute has the two states of the unconditioned and 
the conditioned, the realm of being proper and that of 
life and death. The Mahayana holds a middle position 
regarding the nature of the world. It is neither real nor 
unreal. It affirms that it actually exists, but denies its 
absolute reality. Waves exist, but not absolutely. The 
world is a phenomenon, impermanent, subject to flux and 
change. Since the reality pervades all, everything individual 
is the whole potentially, or, in religious language, every 
individual is a potential Buddha. The Avatamsaka Sutra 
says : “ There is not even one living being that has not the 
wisdom of the tathagata. It is only because of the vain 
thoughts and affections, that all beings are not conscious of 
this.” The individual souls are aspects of the absolute. 
As water is the essence of the waves, so the tathata is the 
reality of persons. That which passes from existence to 
existence is the ego, which is not the imperishable soul. 
The passing ego is an embodiment of the permanent reality, 
and everything on earth has a quintessence of the uncreate 
and eternal reality. “ In the one soul we may distinguish 
two aspects, the soul as pure being and the soul in sam- 
sara . . . the two are so closely inter-related that one 
cannot be separate from the other.” 3 

The rise of the world is accounted for as usual by a 
metaphysics of metaphors. Ignorance or avidya is said 
to be the cause of the world. “ All things on account of 
our confused subjectivity appear under the forms of individu- 
ation. If we could overcome this subjectivity, the signs 
of individuation would disappear, and there would be no 
trace of a world of objects.” 3 “ When the mind of all 

creatures which in its own nature is pure and clean, is 
stirred up by the wind of ignorance, the waves of mentality 

1 The Mahayanists seemed to have been aware of the similarity of their 
position to the Upamsad view. So the Lankavatara Sutra says, that 
“ the explanation of the Tathagatagar’uha as the ultimate truth and reality 
is given in order to attract to our new even those who have superstitious 
faith in the Atman theory'.” 

* Suzuki. Awakening of Faith, p. 55. 


J Ibid., p. 36. 



BUDDHISM AS A RELIGION 595 

make their appearance. These three, mind, ignorance and 
mentality, have no absolute existence.” 1 * 3 Neither subjec- 
tivity nor the external world which is negated is real. “ As 
soon as subjectivity is rendered empty and unreal, we per- 
ceive the pure soul manifesting itself as eternal, permanent, 
immutable, completely comprising all things that are pure.”* 
The explanation of the world is that there is in reality no world 
at all but avidya produces it. Whence did this negative prin- 
ciple of ignorance come ? No answer is given. It is there, 
and it breaks the silence of the absolute, and starts the wheel 
of samsara, transforming the one into the many. We project 
the element of avidya into pure being hypothetically, illu- 
sorily, apparently. The world of experience is a manifesta- 
tion of pure being conditioned by avidya. However illusory 
in its ultimate nature, avidya must exist in the being of 
tathata. Asvaghosa suggests that the avidya is a spark 
arising from the unfathomable depths of pure being. He 
identifies it with consciousness. This awakening of conscious- 
ness marks the first step in the rise of the world from the 
self-identity of tathata or pure being. Then the distinctions 
of subject and object arise. The original being was the 
absolute, where the subject and the object merged into one. 
Though it is different from absolute nothingness, we cannot 
give a logical description of it. The moment we come 
back from that stage which we are said to realise in bodhi 
or perfect enlightenment, we seem to possess the world of 
contrasts and relations. Avidya starts the cosmic process. 
Intellectually we can only say that this element of nega- 
tivity is in the very heart of the absolute. Why ? Because 
it is there. The jewel is in the lotus 3 ; the self- 
creative force is in the absolute. The real and the 

1 P. 68. 

1 In the enlightened condition we know that all things are the one abso- 
lute reality. Asvaghosa writes : “ Ail so-called illusory phenomena are in 
truth from the beginning what they are ; and their essence is nothing but 
the one soul.. Though ignorant minds that cling to illusory objects cannot 
understand that all things are in their nature the highest reality (para- 
marthal, all Buddha tathagatas being free from clinging are able to have 
an insight into the true nature of things — therefore the mind that is saturated 
with subjectivity is annihilated, all things are understood and otnniscn nee 
is attained.” (Suzuki : Awakening oj Faith, p. 126. See also p. 60.) 

3 Cf. Om mam padme hum. 



596 


INDIAN PHILOSOPHY 


phenomenal are not ultimately different. They are two 
moments of the same thing, one reality with two aspects. 
The universe would be utterly unmeaning, absolutely 
unreal, if it were not in some way the expression of the 
real. The realm of birth and death is the manifestation 
of the immortal. It is the appearance in time and space, 
the actualisation of the absolute. The ultimate reality 
is sarvasattva, the soul of all things, real and imaginary. 
" This pure being becomes birth and death (samsara), in which 
are revealed the quintessence, the attributes and the activity 
of the Mahayana or the great reality, (i) The first is the 
greatness of quintessence. The quintessence of the Maha- 
yana as pure being exists in all things, remains unchanged in 
the pure as well as in the defiled, is always one and the same 
(samata), neither increases nor decreases, and is void of 
distinction. (2) The second is the greatness of attributes. 
Here we have the Tathagata’s womb, which contains im- 
measurable and innumerable merits (punya) as its charac- 
teristics. (3) The third is the greatness of activity, for it 
produces all kinds of good works in the world phenomenal 
and super-phenomenal.” 1 


V 

The Mahayana Religion 

The rebellion of man against his nature cannot last long. 
The needs of the human heart stand in the way of the 
unimpeded march of the critical spirit. There were passages 
enough even in the canonical writings to satisfy the heart 
of man. In Majjhima Nikaya (22) it is said that even those 
who have not entered into the paths “ are sure of heaven,” 
" if they have love and faith towards Me.” It is an echo 
of the Gita doctrine of bhakti. The Mahayana uses these 
texts and believes in a saviour God. There is no unity in 
the Mahayana religion. It suffered religious superstitions 
gladly. Wherever it prevailed, India, China, Korea, Siam, 
Burma and Japan, the indigenous religions were tolerated, 
while it took care to teach them a new respect for life, 

> Suzuki : The Awakening of Faith, pp. 53-54. 



BUDDHISM AS A RELIGION 597 

kindness to animals and resignation. So long as men 
conformed to certain ethical rules and respected the order 
of monks, the Buddhist teachers did not feel called upon 
to condemn the superstitious usages. It does not matter 
what gods you worship, so long as you are good. The 
protean character of Mahayana Buddhism is due to this 
tendency. In each of the countries where it was adopted 
it had a separate history and doctrinal development. 

It does not concern us here to narrate the history of 
the later fortunes of the Buddhist faith in countries beyond 
the limits of India. If the Buddhist religion started with a 
grim, austere, self-repressive code, and ended with temple 
courts crumbling, mouldering and worn, it is due to its 
tolerant spirit. It is impossible for crude and rude tribes 
to become converts to Buddhism without making their 
own contribution to it. The freedom of opinion in religious 
matters is in consonance with the metaphysical views 
of the Mahayana. All religions are revelations of the 
same Dharmakaya and bring out some aspects of truth. 
Dharma is the all-pervading spiritual force, the ultimate and 
the supreme principle of life. The first attempt at personi- 
fying dharma is in the conception of Adi Buddha, the first 
cause, the eternal God, superior to all things, the supreme, 
the first of all the Buddhas, without equal or comparison . 1 
Even this Adi Buddha is a metaphysical conception remote 
from life and experience, and not an active force in touch 
with the world which he is said to have brought into being. 
The work of saving the world is done by the Buddhas, or the 
beings endowed with the highest intelligence and love. 
There have been an infinite number of these Buddhas in 
the past, and there will be an infinite number in future. 
Since the goal of every individual is to become a Buddha, 
there are many Buddhas. These who are secure in their 
own prospect of emancipation delay accepting it for the 
good of others They are all transitory manifestations of 
the One Eternal Being. The historic Buddha is one such 
manifestation of the moral ideal. He is not the One Reality, 

1 The Sutralamkara criticises the doctrine of Adi Buddha on the ground 
that no one can become a Buddha without proper equipment (sambhara) 
of merit and knowledge, but this means a long past. 



598 


INDIAN PHILOSOPHY 


but a god among many others. Amitabha sits on one side 
of him, and Avalokitesvara, who saves the faithful by his 
grace, on the other. 1 The supreme Being is viewed in different 
aspects to suit the needs of different men. “ I reveal the 
law in its multifariousness with regard to the inclinations 
and dispositions of creatures, I use different means to rouse 
each according to his own character.” 2 3 Many of the Vedic 
gods become aspects of the One Supreme. Nagarjuna 
by his precept and practice taught that the Hindu gods of 
Brahma, Visnu, fsiva and Kali had the attributes assigned 
to them in the Brahmanical scriptures, and were proper 
objects of propitiation. The traditional gods of the Hindus 
were fitted into a new system, where separate places and 
functions were assigned to them. 3 Mahayanism is so called 
because it included a vast number of bodhisattvas, arch- 
angels and saints, which are only the ancient gods of Vedic 
Aryans thinly disguised by Buddhistic symbolism. There 
is no doubt that in giving a large place to bhakti or devotion 
the Mahayana scheme of salvation opened the breaches 
to Tantrikism and other mystic forms. 4 

The monistic metaphysics of the Mahayana has given 
rise to an apparently polytheistic religion, but we should 
note that the several gods are subordinate to a single head. 
This unity of the Mahayana religion may be brought out 
by relating it to the doctrine of the three kayas, which is 
allegorical in its significance. The Dharmakaya is the 
timeless, unconditioned spiritual reality of dharma. It is 
not a personal being revealing itself in a single historical 
figure, but is the all-pervading ground, which without suffer- 


1 Asvaghosa : Awakening of Faith, Suzuki’s translation, p. 68. 

1 Cf. Bhagavadgita, ix. 44 ff., and Saddharmapundarlka, ii. 

3 Indra becomes Satamanvu and Vajrapani, with his own kingdom 
of heavens (svarga), called Trayastrmsaloka. Brahma had his chief 
characters transferred to Maijusri, the lamp of wisdom. Sarasvatl con- 
tinued to be one of his wives, the other being LaksmI. Avalokitesvara 
or' Padinapani has the attributes of Visnu or Padmanabha. Virupaksa 
is one of the names of £iva, though in Buddhistic legend he is one of the 
four kings. Gane.'a is taken over both as Vinayaka and demon Yinataka. 
The Sapta tathugatas are the seven rsis. Ajita formed with Sakyamuni 
and Avalokitesvara a triad. 

* Cf. Col. Waddell’s description of Mahayana Buddhism as " a mysticism 
of sophistic nihilism." 



BUDDHISM AS A RELIGION 


599 


ing any modification assumes a variety of forms. The 
Dharmakaya answers to the impersonal absolute, the 
Brahman of the Upanisads. It is not so much the body of 
the law as the fathomless being or the norm of all existence. 1 
When the absolute principle assumes name and form, we 
have the transformation of the Dharmakaya into the 
Sambhogakaya. The substance which persists becomes the 
subject which enjoys. The Brahman is now the Isvara. 
He is the God in heaven, determined by the name and form, 
omniscient, omnipresent, omnipotent, the Adi Buddha, 
supreme over all the Buddhas. When we pass to the 
Nirmanakaya, we get the several manifestations of this 
one activity into avatars, or incarnations. 

Every Buddha partakes of the nature of the three kayas. 
The very nature of the Buddha is the bodhi, or enlighten- 
ment. But till he attains absolute nirvana he possesses 
and enjoys the fruit of his deeds as a bodhisattva, and has 
a beatific body, or sambhogakaya. The historical Buddhas 
are these real Buddhas, sovereigns of celestial worlds ap- 
pearing on earth to redeem mankind. “I am one of a long 
series of Buddhas. Many were born before and many 
will be born in future. When the wickedness and violence 
rule over the earth, Buddha takes his birth to establish 
the kingdom of righteousness on earth.” 2 3 “ The exalted 
one appears in the world for salvation to many people, 
for joy to many people, out of compassion for the world, as 
a blessing, a salvation, the joy of gods and men.” 3 

So far as the Mahayana is concerned, there is practically 
nothing to distinguish it from the religion of the Bhagavadgita. 
The metaphysical conception of Dharmakaya, or the ultimate 
foundation of existence, corresponds to the Brahman of the 
Gita. As Krsna calls himself the Supreme One, even so 
Buddha is made into a Supreme God. He is not an ordinary 
deity, but the devatideva, the paramount God of gods. 4 
He is the creator of all bodhisattvas.5 That Buddha reached 


1 This is evident from its synonyms, Svabhavakaya, or nature-body ; 
Tattva, snchness ; 6unya, the abyss; the Nirvana; the eternal liberty; 

Samadhikaya, or the rapture body. 

3 Cf. this with the Gita, iv. 7-8. 3 Anguttara Nikaya. 

♦ Saddharmapundarika, vii. 31. 5 Ibid , xiv. 



600 


INDIAN PHILOSOPHY 


bodhi, enlightenment at Gaya, is a fancy of the unregenerate. 
“ I am the father of the world, sprung from myself,” says 
Buddha of himself, " it is only because I know how the fatuous 
are of perverted sense and blind that I, who have never ceased 
to exist, give myself out as departed.” 1 Buddha has been 
from eternity. His enormous love for humanity is brougnt 
out by the parable of the burning house. 2 3 All beings are 
his children. 3 “ The Tathagata, having left the conflagration 
of the three worlds, is dwelling in peace in the tranquillity 
of his forest abode, saying to himself all three worlds are 
my possession, all living beings are my children, the world 
is full of intense tribulation, but I myself will work out their 
salvation.” “ To all who believe me I do good, while friends 
are they to me who seek refuge in me. ”4 

The doctrine of the three kayas is applied to the individual 
human being. In all beings there is the Dharmakaya, 
or the permanent reality ; immediately over it we have 
the body of enjoyment, or the Sambhogakaya, the spirit 
individualised, and then the Nirmanakaya, where the mind 
is defiled. 


VI 

Ethics 

The ethical ideal of the Mahayana is the bodhisattva, 
as distinct from the arhat of the Hinayana. Bodhisattva 
literally means “ one whose essence is perfect knowledge.” 
But historically it means “ one who is on the way to the 
attainment of perfect knowledge, a future Buddha.” The 
term was first used of Gautama Buddha during the period 
of his search for liberation. It therefore came to mean 
“ a Buddha designate,” or a man destined to become a Buddha 
in this or in some future life. When once nirvana is attained, 
all earthly relations come to an end. A bodhisattva out 
of the abundance of his love for suffering humanity stops 
short of nirvana. Weak man in times of stress and sorrow 

1 Saddharmabimdarlka, xv. 21. See B.G., iv. 9. 

1 Lotus, chap, iii ; Mahavagga, i. 21. 

3 Lotus, p. 89. 

« Lalitavistara, viii. Cf. B.G., vii. 16. 



BUDDHISM AS A RELIGION 


601 


requires a personal guide, and these lofty beings, who can 
tread the path of the nirvana, engage themselves in the 
task of leading men into the true way of knowledge. The 
Hlnayana ideal 'of complete absorption, or arhattva, the 
lonely journey on the trackless path of eternity, this isolated 
bliss is, according to Mahayana, the temptation of the Mara . 1 

The career of an aspirant to Buddhahood represented in 
the early Buddhism by the eight-fold path is here elaborated 
into ten bhumis or stages. The first stage is the joyful 
(pramudita) one characterised by the rise of the thought of 
bodhi . 2 It is here that the bodhisattva makes those preg- 
nant resolutions (pranidhana) which determine the future 
course. The resolution of Avalokitesvara not to accept 
salvation until the last particle of dust shall have attained 
to Buddhahood before him is such a vow. The insight is 
developed gradually so as to render the heart pure and the 
mind free from the illusion of self. The recognition of the 
impermanence of things enlarges the aspirant’s compassionate 
nature, and we get next the stage of vimala, or purity. In 
it we have the practice of morality and the exercise of wisdom 
(adhicitta). In the next stage the bodhisattva engages 
himself in the various bhavanas which enable him to annihilate 
anger, hatred and error, and promote faith, compassion, 
charity and disinterestedness. This is the third stage 
(prabhakarl), where the seeker shines with patience and 
forbearance. The bodhisattva, to surrender all traces of 
egoism, trains himself in good work and applies himself 
specially to the cultivation of virtues connected with bodhi 
(bodhipaksa dharma). It is the fourth radiant stage 
(arcismatl). Then does the seeker begin a course of study 
and meditation to understand the four noble truths in 
their true light. It is the fifth invincible (sudurjaya) stage 
where dhyana and samadhi predominate. As a result 
of moral practice and meditation, the seeker turns to the 
basic principles of dependent origination and non-substanti- 


« Astasahasrikaprajuaparamita, xi. To use William James’s picturesque 
expression, if at the last day all creation was shouting hallelujah, and there 
remained one cockroach with an unrequited love, that would spoil the peace 
of a bodhisattva, though not the absorption of the arhat. 

* Cittotpada. 



602 INDIAN PHILOSOPHY 

ality. This stage is called abhimukhi, or " turned towards.” 
Here prajna reigns. Yet he is not completely free from 
passion, and still has the desires of becoming a Buddha and 
the intention of saving mankind. He devotes himself to 
the attainment of that knowledge which would enable him 
to effect his aim of universal salvation. He is now in the 
seventh stage, called durarhgama. When he is free from 
the eager desire for the particular, his thoughts are not bound 
to any special objects, and he becomes immovable (acala). 
This is the eighth stage where the supreme virtue of 
(anutpattikadharmacaksuh) seeing all things such as they 
are, i.e. rooted in tathata, dominates. The activity of the 
bodhisattva is tainted by no duality or selfishness. He 
is not content with tranquil repose, but is actually engaged 
in the teaching of dharma to others. It is the ninth stage, 
that of the good ones (sadhumati) when all his acts are un- 
selfish, done without desire It is said of Gautama Buddha 
that there is not a single spot in this vast earth where He 
has not in some past life denied his life for the sake of others. 
The bodhisattva of the Mahayana answers to the awakened 
of the Upanisads, the Saviour of Christianity, the super- 
man of Nietzsche, for he helps the world, which is powerless 
to accomplish its end by itself. The bodhisattva becomes 
a tathagata in the tenth stage, a cloud of dharma (dharma- 
megha). Salvation means conformity of life to dharma. 
It is the manifestation of universal love for men and animals. 
Mahayana Buddhism has two stages higher than the arhatship, 
namely, the bodhisattva and the Buddha. The doctrine 
of the bodhisattva is so characteristic of the Mahayana that 
it is sometimes called the Bodhisattvayana, or obtaining 
deliverance by practising the virtues of a bodhisattva. 

The principles of moral life are dana (charity), vlrya 
(fortitude), sila (morality), ksanti (patience), and dhyana 
(meditation), and crowning all, prajna, the home of peace 
and blessing. The severity of monasticism is relaxed. 
Whether you should become a monk or not depends on your 
character and temperament It is possible to reach the 
goal though married. Asceticism and poverty, so common 
in Hinayana ethics, are almost exceptional. To follow 
Buddha’s commands is the way to salvation. Stress is 



BUDDHISM AS A RELIGION 


603 


also laid on faith in God or bhakti. In his commentary 
on the Prajnaparamita, Nagarjuna says : “ Faith is the 
entrance to the ocean of the laws of the Buddha and know- 
ledge is the ship on which one can sail in it.” The Maha- 
yana does not believe in the possibility of emancipation 
through one’s own powers. The help of a saviour is necessary. 
Prayer and worship have a meaning so long as we are on the 
path, though not when we reach the end. The doctrines 
of karma, or the continuous working of our deeds good or 
bad, is tempered by mercy, which finds expression in the 
easier way of salvation by faith. Three classes of Sravakas or 
hearers, Pratyeka Buddhas, and Bodhisattvas are recognised. 
Piety is the means adopted by the first, knowledge by the 
second, devotion to the spiritual weal of others by the 
third . 1 

While the Hlnayana made nirvana attainable by a few 
only through the life of a monk, the Mahayana taught that 
every man could a im at becoming a bodhisattva, and even 
low caste men could attain salvation by the practice of 
virtue and devotion to Buddha. The ethical humanism 
and universalism characteristic of the Mahayana are quite 
in the spirit of early Buddhism. It was Buddha’s mission 
to extend the blessings of salvation to all mankind. “ Go 
ye now, O Bhiksus, for the benefit of the many, for the 
welfare of mankind, out of compassion for the world. Preach 
the doctrine which is glorious in the beginning, glorious 
in the middle and glorious in the end, in spirit as well as 
in letter.” To the Hlnayana morality is essentially a 
negative process, purging the soul of worldly desire and 
evil The bodhisattva ideal is more positive. The doctrine 
specially associated with it is that of parivarta, or turning 
over of ethical merit to the advantage of others. It reminds 
one of the doctrine of vicarious atonement, which proceeds 
on the view of the oneness of life. No man lives to himself 
alone. The good or evil of one affects the whole. 

Whether the metaphysical truth that nothing on earth 
is real, and the ethical law that we should work and suffer 
for our neighbour, can be reconciled or not, is a problem for 
the Madhyamika system. Apparently, the bodhisattva of 
• See AAguttara Nikaya, ii. 245. 

20 


VOL. I 



604 INDIAN PHILOSOPHY 

the Mahayana still harbours the illusion or the moha, that 
he must save the world. 

In the Mahayana the emphasis is not on nirvana, but on 
the obtaining of bodhi or enlightened sainthood. Nirvana is 
freedom of the soul. Gradually it came to mean the happy 
state of concentration centred on eternity. Kramamukti, or 
steady attainment of freedom, is instituted, as in the 
Brahmanical systems to give solace to the heart of man 
which longs for immortal bliss. The existence of Buddhas 
after the end of their earthly career is admitted. The 
idea of nirvana is displaced by a paradise with hell opposed 
to it. On the road to sanctity or the bodhisattvahood, the 
individual enjoys numerous existences on celestial planes. 
Mahayana indulged rather over much in these celestial 
existences and postponed the question of ultimate nirvana. 
When, however, the question is taken up, it is answered in 
the traditional Buddhist manner. It means freedom from 
rebirth, 1 the cutting off of the chain of existence, 2 the 
rooting out of desire, spite and ignorance, 3 or an uncon- 
ditioned being. 4 Since our existences are conditioned, nirvana 
is unconditioned being. It is not non-existence pure and 
simple, but real freedom, where ignorance is overcome. 
What happens to a bodhisattva when he becomes a 
Buddha ? Is he reabsorbed into the absolute being, 
or does he retain his individuality ? The Mahayana is 
not clear on this point, though it inclines mostly to the 
latter alternative. To become a Buddha is to become one 
in essence with the infinite. Asvaghosa describes the 
perfect condition thus : “ It is like the emptiness of space 
and the brightness of the mirror, in that it is true, real and 
great. It completes and perfects all things. It is free 
from the condition of destructibility. In it is reflected every 
phase of life and activity in the world. Nothing goes out 
of it, nothing enters into it, nothing is annihilated, nothing 
is destroyed. It is one eternal soul, no forms of defilement 

1 Punarjanmanivrtti. Asvaghosa, Buddhacarita, xv. 30. 

1 Nagarjuna. 3 Ratnakufa Sutra. 

< Vajracchedika. The Bodhic-aryavatara makes it the giving up of the 
world and egoism. The Ratnamegha accepts this definition. The Praj 'iapa- 
ramita considers nirvana to be profound, fathomless being. Candrakirti iden- 
tifies nirvana with sunyata, or knowledge, which puts an end to all illusions. 



BUDDHISM AS A RELIGION 605 

can defile it ; it is the essence of intelligence." According 
to Asanga, nirvana is the union with the Great Soul of the 
universe, or Mahatman. The Mahayanists are anxious to 
make out that nirvana is not annihilation. 

VII 

The Fall of Buddhism in India 

The vital reason for the disappearance of Buddhism 
from India is the fact that it became ultimately indistinguish- 
able from the other flourishing forms of Hinduism, Vaish- 
navism, fsaivism and Tantrik belief. India had a more 
popular religion, a cult which could satisfy her imagination 
by its picturesqueness. The old Buddhism, which denied the 
very being of God, offered no hope of human immortality and 
looked upon all life as misery, love of life as the greatest 
evil, and the end of man as the extinction of all desire, lost 
its power. Mahayanism was unable to acquire the prestige 
of primitive Buddhism, and so proved weak and vacillating 
in its conflicts with Brahmanical religion. Moreover, it 
grew weaker as it spread wider. It had developed elaborate 
superstitions which dissatisfied the people at large. Through- 
out its conquests it did not aim at the suppression of other 
religions, but tried to suffuse them with its own ethical 
spirit. It accommodated itself to all men and to all time ;, 
with the result that paradises were added and animistic 
ideas introduced. This tendency of compromise was its 
strength as well as its weakness. The spirit which breathes 
in the Xllth Edict of Asoka, that " there should be no 
praising of one’s sect and decrying of other sects, but on 
the contrary a rendering of honour to other sects for what- 
ever cause honour may be due to them,” was the characteristic 
feature of Mahayanism. It adopted the tactics later 
sanctified by St. Paul, who became a Jew to the Jews and 
all things to all men that he might gain a few at least 
In each country Mahayanism had its own form. 1 When 

1 These developments of Mahayana are described in Hackmann's 
Buddhism as a Religion. The historian of Buddhism will have to take into 
account the Avatariisaka, the Dhyana and the Mantra schools, as well as 
the Chinese Tientai and the Japanese Nichiren. 



606 INDIAN PHILOSOPHY 

it gave place to devotion, bhakti and salvation, it opened 
the flood-gates to all forms of superstition. Hideous ex- 
travagances had to be defended with futile dialectic. Mystic 
forms of animism were smuggled into the great sphere of 
truth. Its hospitality to the stories of magic, clairvoyance 
and ghost-seeing weakened it. The disciples surrounded 
with cheap marvels and wonders the lonely figure with a 
serene soul, simple and austere in the yellow robes, walking 
with bared feet and bowed head towards the city of Benares. 
To inspire the outer world with respect for the figure of 
the master, honest propagandists developed rather dishonest 
history. It is impossible to believe Buddha to be the son of 
a mortal father. To make a god of him, stories were invented 
“ Under the overpowering influence of these sickly imagina- 
tions the moral teachings of Gautama have been almost hid 
from view. The theories grew and flourished, each new step, 
each new hypothesis demanded another ; until the whole 
sky was filled with forgeries of the brain, and the nobler and 
simpler lessons of the founder of the religion were smothered 
beneath the glittering mass of metaphysical subtleties .” 1 
The Buddhistic monks lost their old apostolic fervour. The 
monasticism of Buddhism became as bad as any priesthood. 
" Not mendicant monks, devoted to a pure life, but opulent 
churches with fat priests ; not simple discourses calculated 
to awaken the moral and religious consciousness, but subtle 
arguments on discipline and metaphysics, were now what 
Buddhism represented .” 2 The life of Buddhism was choked 
by the mass of superstition, selfishness and sensuality which 
surrounded it. The result was that when Yuan Chwang 
visited India he found the realities of primitive Buddhism 
swamped by the rubbish of myth and legend. The faith 
which was glorious in the days of ASoka, and not without 
inspiration even so late as the time of Kaniska, was lost 
in a wilderness of marvels and miracles such as those of 
endless Buddhas and immaculate conceptions. 

In addition to the degeneration of Buddhism there was 
the stronghold of the past. The life of the people was 
dominated by the Brahmanical faith. Even Buddhism 
could thrive only by accepting Brahmanical gods. Early 

1 Rhys Davids : Buddhism. i Hopkins 



BUDDHISM AS A RELIGION 607 

Buddhism included Indra, Brahma and other divinities. The 
new converts carried into it much of their reverence for the 
old gods. The Hlnayana accepted Brahma, Visnu and 
Narayana in their own names. The Mahayana, we have 
seen, never seriously opposed itself to the Hindu doctrines 
and practices. It elaborated the mythology and spoke of a 
hierarchy of divine grades and capacities, at the head of 
which was Adi Buddha. While the Brahmins looked upon 
Buddha as an incarnation of Visnu, the Buddhists returned 
the compliment by identifying Visnu with Bodhisattva 
Padmapani, called AvalokiteSvara. Religion became a 
private affair, and the Brahmin ascetics were looked upon 
as the brethern of the Buddhist samanas. Brahmanism 
and the Mahayana faith affirmed identical philosophical and 
religious views. The pertinacity characteristic of the Indian 
mind showed itself in a monistic idealism in philosophy 
and freedom of worship in religion (istadevataradhana). 
The Mahayana metaphysics and religion correspond to 
the Advaita metaphysics and theism. In serving the needs 
of a large majority of men, it became only a feeble copy of 
the Bhagavadgita. A gradual process of intellectual absorp- 
tion and modification developed to such an extent as to 
countenance the theory that Mahayanism was only a sectarian 
phase of the great Vaisnava movement . 1 The Hlnayana, 
with its more ascetic character, came to be regarded as a 
sect of Saivism. Buddhism found that it had nothing dis- 
tinctive to teach. When the Brahmanical faith inculcated 
universal love and devotion to God and proclaimed Buddha 
to be an avatar of Visnu, the death knell of Buddhism in 
India was sounded. Buddhism repeated the merits as well 
as the faults of Hinduism. The hand of the immeasurable 
past, with its congenial fancies and inherited beliefs, again 
took hold of the country, and Buddhism passed away by 
becoming blended with Hinduism. 

Buddhism died a natural death in India . 2 It is an inven- 

» The transition of Buddhism into Vaisnavism may be seen in Pun 
of Orissa, where a temple originally dedicated to Gautama Buddha is now 
the dwelling of Krsna, in the form of Jagannatha (Lokanatha). The 
only relic of Buddhism we find there is that men of all castes eat the food 
cooked in the house of God. 

* See Monier Williams: Buddhism, chap. vii. 



608 


INDIAN PHILOSOPHY 


tion of the interested to say that fanatic priests fought 
Buddhism out of existence. It is true that Kumarila and 
Samkara criticised Buddhistic doctrines, but the resistance 
offered by Brahmanism to Buddhism is the natural resistance 
of an old organisation to a new development which came 
to have nothing really new. The violent extermination of 
Buddhism in India is legendary. Buddhism and Brahmanism 
approached each other so much that for a time they 
were confused and ultimately became one. Slow absorption 
and silent indifference, and not priestly fanaticism and 
methodical destruction, are the causes of the fall of 
Buddhism. 

The history of Buddhism is decisive on a crucial problem 
of life. It establishes the enormous difficulty of having a 
pure morality, independent of spiritual sanctions. It failed 
to bring to India a real spiritual deliverance in spite of the 
fact that it laid powerful emphasis on a severely simple life 
of pure goodness. Early Buddhism provided a rallying 
centre for revolting individuals. The Hlnayana' by its 
exaggerations betrayed the central weakness of Buddhist 
systems. The Mahayana, in trying to correct the deficiency 
of the Hlnayana, went to the other extreme and contradicted 
the spirit of Buddha by allowing all sorts of superstitions to 
meddle with spiritual life. Uncompromising devotion to 
the moral law is the secret of the strength of Buddhism, 
and its neglect of the mystical side of man’s nature the cause 
of its failure. 


VIII 

Influence of Buddhism on Indian Thought 

Buddhism has left a permanent mark on the culture of 
India. Its influence is visible on all sides. The Hindu 
faith has absorbed, the best of its ethics. A new respect for 
life, kindness to animals, a sense of responsibility and an 
endeavour after higher life are brought home to the Indian 
mind with a renewed force. The Brahmanical systems, 
as a result of Buddhist influence, cast into the shade those 
parts of their religion which were irreconcilable with humanity 



BUDDHISM AS A RELIGION 609 

and reason. 1 The Mahabharata has echoes of the fine side of 
Buddhism. “ By conquest hatred is increased, and by hatred 
hatred is not destroyed.” 2 After Buddhism it became well- 
nigh impossible for Indian thought to adopt a hopeful view of 
the world. The standards which till then satisfied the mind of 
man could no more be sustained. Human existence is an evil 
and mukti is freedom from being. Later systems of thought 
accept it. Nyaya counted birth (janma) and activity 
(pravrtti) among evils.3 Both good and evil are undesir- 
able since they involve rebirth. We return to the world 
to enjoy the reward or undergo the punishment. To be 
born is simply to die. To be happy is not to be born. The 
revolt of spirit against matter has dominated the history of 
Indian thought since the time of Buddha. All thinkers 
subsequent to him have lived in the shadow of the great 
renunciation. The end of life is symbolised by the robe of 
the sannyasin. The evil of desire is exaggerated. 4 The 
world is bound by desire. 5 Indian thought was forced to 
reckon with the reflections of Buddhism on the instability 
of life and the doctrine of relativity. Some of Buddha’s 
misunderstandings and some of his deeper insights have 
affected the course of subsequent thought. The best things 
of the world die before they are re-born, and even so has 
Buddhism perished in India, to be born again in a refined 
Brahmanism. Buddha to-day lives in the lives of those 
Indians who have not given up their past traditions. His 
presence is felt in all around. Throughout worshipped 
as a god, he has a place in the mythology which is still alive, 
and so long as the old faith remains without crumbling down 
before the corrosive influence of the new spirit, Buddha will 
have a place among the gods of India. His life and teaching 

1 In a work called Acaramayukha, ascribed to one § uiikara, the follow- 
ing five objectionable things are prohibited : (i) oblations to fire. (2) the 

killing of cows for sacrifices, (3) self-torturing austerities, (4) the use of 
flesh in the sacrificial feasts to the manes of the ancestors, and (5) marrying 
the widow of the deceased brother Agnihotrarii gavalambharh sannyasam 
phalapaitrkam devarena sutotpattih kalau panca vivarjayet. See also 
Ninjavasindhu, iii. Another reading has “ aSval.imbharh ” for " agnihotram.” 

1 Udyogaparva, 71. 56 and 63. 3 N.S., 1. 2 ; iv. 55. 

4 Janma duhkham jara duhkham, jaya. duhkham punali punah ; 

Asasah paramarh duhkham, nirasalj paramarh sukham. 

5 Asaya badhyate loke. 



610 INDIAN PHILOSOPHY 

will compel the reverence of mankind, give ease to man) 
troubled minds, gladden many simple hearts, and answer 
to many innocent prayers. 

REFERENCES 

Saddharma Pundanka, S.B.E., xxi. 

Buddhist Mahayana Texts, S.B.E., 1, 

Suzuki : Mahayana Buddhism. 

Suzuki : The Awakening of Faith. 

Coomaraswamy : Buddha and the Gospel of Buddhism. 



CHAPTER XI 


THE SCHOOLS OF BUDDHISM 


Introduction — The four schools of realism and idealism — The Vaibha- 
sikas — Nature of reality — Knowledge — Psychology — The Sautranti- 
kas — Knowledge of the external world — God and nirvana — The Yoga- 
caras — Their theory of knowledge — Nature of Alayavijnana — 
Subjectivism— Criticism of it by ^amkara and Kumlrila — Individual 
self— Forms of knowledge— The Yog.icara theory of the world — 
Avidya and Alaya — Nirvana — Ambiguity of Alayavijnana — The 
Madhyamikas — Literature — The Madhyamika criticism of the Yoga- 
cara — Phenomenalism — Theory of relations — -Two kinds of know- 
ledge — Absolutism— ^unjavada — Nirvana — Ethics — Conclusion. 


I 

The Four Schools of Buddhism 

Buddha used critical analysis as the way to truth. He 
insisted on observation and reasoning. His religion was 
not dogmatic. A saying is attributed to Buddha to the 
effect : “ One must not accept my law from reverence, but 
first try it as gold is tried by fire.” 1 By leaving the meta- 
physical background free for the flight of the speculators, 
Buddha increased the uncertainty about the ultimate foun- 
dations of things. Early Buddhism contained germs 
capable of development along different lines. The same 
thoughts do not always grow in others as they do 
in their founders. So when speculative thinkers stripped 
Buddhism of much that was living and personal, it 

1 Unfortunately, this philosophic spirit declined when large numbers 
accepted Buddhism as a religion. Faith in Buddha’s words increased. 
“ All that the Lord Buddha has said is well said,” said Asoka. In the 
Divyavadana it is declared ** The sky will fall with the moon and stars, 
earth with its mountains and forests will ascend, oceans will be dried up, but 
the Buddhas speak not wrongly.” 

611 

VOL. i 20* 



612 INDIAN PHILOSOPHY 

became reduced to a number of abstract positions from 
which different thinkers according to their inclinations 
developed different systems. Experience according to 
Buddha was the only substantial datum open to us, the 
real existence, the ultimate fact that all thought must 
reckon with. The empiricism of Buddha led to a thorough 
criticism and disintegration of conventional beliefs. The 
empiricism of the Buddhist schools is an intelligent applica- 
tion of the critical method to experience itself. Through 
the pressure of logic rather than of set design, Buddhism 
resulted in different schools of thought. At a very early 
date after Buddha’s death, differences of belief and practice 
began to appear. Even at the time of the Council at Vaisali, 
there were doctrinal disputes which led to the great meeting, 
Mahasangha of the seceders, who themselves split up into 
eight different schools. The Theras who convened the 
Vaisali Council also developed in the second century B.c. 
a number of schools, though their main branch supported 
the Sarvastivada or the realistic theory that everything 
exists. The Pali canon bears witness to the opposed move- 
ments of thought, and Kathavatthu deals with many of 
these sects an schools . 1 Hindu thinkers do not refer to 
these schools of Buddhist thought which arose before the 
first century B.c. According to them there are four chief 
Buddhist schools, of which two belong to the Hinayana and 
two to the Mahayana. The Hinayana schools are the Vai- 
bhasikas and the Sautrantikas, who are realists or Sarvastiva 
dins, believing that there is a self-existent universe actual in 
space and time, where mind holds a place on equal terms with 
other finite things. The Mahayana schools are the Yogacaras, 
who are idealists, and the Madhyamikas. The Yogacaras 
contend that thought is self-creative and all producing. 
It is the ultimate principle, and even the ultimate type 
and form of reality. The Madhyamika philosophy is a 
negative critical system, formulating the metaphysical 
background of the Mahayana Sutras. The Madhyamikas 
are sometimes called Sarvavainasikas or nihilists . 2 


1 See J.R.A.S., 1S91, and Journal of the Pali Text Society, 1904-1905. 

* I-tsing, of the sixth century, says : " Those who worship the bodhisattvas 
and read the Mahayana Sutras are called the Maliayanists (the great), while 



THE SCHOOLS OF BUDDHISM 


613 


The tendencies of the speculative systems of Buddhism, 
though they were long in existence, were formulated and 
codified only after the time of Kaniska. The systems of 
Hindu thought criticise these schools, thus indicating that 
the latter belong to a period earlier than the Hindu systems 
themselves. We shall not be far wrong if we assign them 
to the second century a.d., though some of the more distin- 
guished exponents of this or that school may belong to a 
later era. In the third century after Buddha’s death the 
Vaibhasikas came into prominence, and the Sautrantikas 
in the fourth century after his death. The Madhyamikas, 
according to Aryadeva, came into existence five hundred 
years after Buddha’s death. Asariga, the founder of the 
Yogacara school, is at least as late as the third century a.d. 
Buddhist philosophic thought reached its most vigorous life 
in the fifth, sixth and seventh centuries. 


II 

The Vaibhasikas 

The speculative schools attached to the Hlnayana belong 
to the Sarvastivada or pluralistic realism . 1 The Vaibhasikas 
are so called because they consider the language of the 

those who do not perform deeds are called the HInayanists (the small). 
There are but two kinds of the so-called Mahayana. First, the Madhyamika, 
second, the Yoga ; the former profess that what is commonly called existence 
is in reality non-existence, and every object is but an empty show, like an 
illusion, whereas the latter affirm that there exist no outer things in reality, 
but only inward thoughts, and all things exist only in the mind." (Taka- 
kusu’s I-tsing, p. 15.) 

1 The Sarvastivadins, otherwise called Hetuvadms or causationalists, 
consider seven works to be of importance, of which the chief is Katyayanl- 
putra’s Jndnaprasthdna composed about three hundred years after Buddha’s 
death. The commentary on this called the Mahavibhasa was compiled 
by five hundred arhats under the leadership of Vasumitra, probably after 
the great council under Kaniska. A summary of it is found in Vasubandhu's 
Abhidharmakosa. Yasomitra is the author of the Abhidharmakosavydkhya 
Fragmentary parts of Udanavagga, Dhammapada and Ekottaragama are 
influenced by the Sarvastivada. Asvaghosa’s Buddhacanta, in spite of its 
emphasis on devotion to Buddha and Aryasura’s j alakamdla, seem to belong to 
this school. Bhadanta (third century A D.), Dharmatrata, Ghosaka and 
Buddhadeva are other prominent exponents of this view, though they do 
not agree with one another on all points. 



614 INDIAN PHILOSOPHY 

other schools to be absurd, viruddhabhasa , 1 or because 
they attached themselves to the Vibhasa or the commentary 
on the Abhidharma. They reject the authority of the Sutras 
altogether and acknowledge only the Abhidharma. They 
appeal to experience, which bears unimpeachable witness 
to the nature of things. By experience they mean know- 
ledge produced by direct contact with the object. The world 
is open to perception. It is wrong to think that there is 
no perception of the external world. For without perception 
there can be no inference. We cannot derive a vyapti or 
universal proposition if we do not have perceptions for our 
data. To speak of an inference absolutely independent of 
any objects perceived is opposed to all common sense . 2 So 
objects are of two kinds, the perceived and the inferred, the 
sensible and the cogitable. Though here and there external 
objects may be known to exist by inference, still as a rule 
perception points to their existence. A distinction is made 
between the inner world of ideas and the outer world of 
objects. There is a difference in the way things hang together 
in thought and the way in which they hang together in 
nature. The Vaibhasikas are natural dualists who maintain 
the independent existence of nature and mind. Episte- 
mologically their theory is a naive realism. The mind is 
conscious of objects. Our knowledge or awareness of things 
not mental is no creation, but only discovery. Things are 
given to us. The substance of things has a permanent 
existence throughout the three divisions of past, present and 
future. 

The permanent substances are not the transitory pheno- 
mena, but the elements which underlie them. Some Sar- 
vastivadins maintain the eternal existence of the noumenal 
counterparts of the five skandhas or elements of things. 
They avoid the difficulty of causation, since according to 
them cause and effect refer to two phases of one thing. 
Water is the common substance of ice and steam. The 
phases are momentary, but the substratum is permanent. 
Aryadeva puts this view of cause in the following words : 
“ The cause never perishes, but only changes its name 
when it becomes an effect having changed its state. For 

1 See S.D.S. * Sakalalokanubhavavirodhai ca. 



THE SCHOOLS OF BUDDHISM 615 

example, clay becomes the jar, having changed its state, and 
in this case the name clay is lost and the name jar arises.” 1 
The objects we see cease to exist when they are not 
perceived. They have but a brief duration like a lightning 
flash. The atoms are immediately separated and their 
aggregation is but instantaneous. Things exist for four 
moments, those of production, existence, decay and death. 
Still, it is not perception that makes them into objects. The 
objects have an existence independent of our perception even 
though they cease to exist the moment we cease to perceive. 
The Vaibhasikas, however, as well as the Sautrantikas 
admit the permanent reality of the underlying elements 
or their extra-mental existence. No definite account is 
given of the relation between the underlying reality and the 
phenomenal manifestations. The view of the elements or 
the noumenal counterparts of things is not clear. We are 
often told that even these elements are momentary. They 
are sometimes reduced to mere hypostatised concepts . 2 The 
self called pudgala has no existence apart from the elements 
of personal life. The unity of the individual is a fiction for 
the continuous flow of mental states. The theory rests on 

1 Compare the view elaborated in Abhidharmakosabhasya : “ Are we to 
think that wood perishes by contact with flames ? — Yes, for we no longer 
see the wood when it is burnt, and no reasoning is worth the evidence of 
our senses. No — it is a matter of reasoning ; for even if we no longer see 
the wood, that may be the outcome of the fact that it perishes of itself and 
ceases to be renewed. The non-existence of the wood which you say is 
caused by fire is a pure nothingness, a nonentity, and nonentity cannot 
be an effect and cannot be caused. Besides, if destruction or non-existence 
which succeeds existence had sometimes a cause, it would always, like births, 
have a cause. And you willingly admit that flame, sound and thought 
are momentary by nature " (iv. 2). “ If things perish without cause from 

their very nature, as objects thrown into the air fall, then they must perish 
in the moment of their birth, and they cannot exist beyond the moment 
in which they actually receive being ; for if destruction, being without cause, 
does not take place at the very birth of the thing, it will not take place 
later, for the thing remains what it is ’’ (ibid.). If you say the thing ripens, 
grows older, etc., what grows older, what changes, is a series. The notion 
of change is contradictory. “ That the same thing should become other 
than it is is absurd. That the thing should remain the same and its 
characters become different is absurd ” (ibid. iv. 2). If things are momen- 
tary, then they perish of themselves without any cause. A flame dies because 
it is momentary and not because it is blown out. We cannot destroy what 
exists, nor can we destroy what does not exist. 

* See the Journal of the Pali Text Society, 1913-1914, p. 133. 



616 


INDIAN PHILOSOPHY 


naturalistic assumptions, and when strictly developed takes 
us to materialism or sensationalism. Realising that we are 
dealing with transitory phenomena, the Sautrantikas argue 
that the underlying substances are inferred by us and not 
directly perceived. 

The Vaibhasikas and the Sautrantikas admit the reality of 
an outer world. Objects are distinguished by them into the 
bahya, or the external, and the abhyantara, or the internal. 
Under the former they have bhuta, or the elements, and 
bhautika, or objects belonging to the elements. Under 
the latter they have citta, or intelligence, and caitta, or 
those belonging to intelligence . 1 

There are only four elements, and not five : earth, which 
is hard ; water, which is cool ; fire, which is warm ; and air, 
which is mobile. The fifth element, akasa, is not recognised. 
The external objects are the results of the gathering together 
of the ultimate atoms according to their capacity. The 
atomic theory is accepted by the Vaibhasikas and the 
Sautrantikas. All objects are ultimately reducible to atoms. 
The Vaibhasikas maintain that the atom has six sides, 
and yet is one, for the space within the atom cannot be 
divided. They also hold that the atoms can be perceived in 
a mass, though we cannot see them singly, even as we see a 
mass of hair, but not a single hair . 2 An atom is the smallest 


1 We may take note of the subjective and the objective classifications 
noticed in Vasubandhu’s AbhidharmakoSa. The subjective classification is 
simple. We have the five skandhas or constituents of being, the twelve 
ayatanas or locations, and the eighteen dhatus or bases. The objective 
classification deals with two kinds of objects, the asaiiiskrta dharmas (non- 
composite) and the samskrta dharmas (composite). Of the non-composite 
dharmas, which are not produced by things, which are self-existent and 
exempt from change, i.e. origin, growth and destruction, there are three : 
(i) Pratisaiiikhyanirodha, (2) apratisaiiikhyanirodha, (3) akaSa or space. 
Of the composite dharmas there are four kinds : (1) The eleven rupa- 

dharmas (rupa equals matter), (2) the one citta (mind), (3) the forty-six 
caitta dharmas, and ( 4 ) the fourteen cittaviprayukta, or non-mental com- 
posites. The seventy-two composite dharmas and the three non-composite 
dharmas exhaust all the things. The word dharma means a number of 
things in Buddhism, such as law, rule, faith, religion, worldly phenomena, 
things, state : here it is used for any existing object. See Sogen : Systems of 
Buddhistic Thought. 

1 The Nyaya Sutras hold that the atom is transcendental, not perceptible 
to the senses. N.S., ii. i. 36; iv 2. 14. 



THE SCHOOLS OF BUDDHISM 


617 


particle of rupa, according to Vasubandbu. 1 It cannot be 
placed anywhere or trampled on or seized or attracted. It 
is neither long nor short, neither square nor round, neither 
curved nor straight, neither high nor low. It is indivisible, 
unanalysable, invisible, inaudible, untastable and intangible. 3 
The atoms cannot penetrate one another. The Vaibhasikas 
and the Sautrantikas do not admit double or triple atoms, 
though they allow indefinite atomic aggregations. Compound 
substances are composites of primary elements. Bodies 
which are the objects of sense are aggregates of atoms-. 
Material things which offer resistance to sense-organs are 
collections of the fourfold substrata of rupa, colour, smell, 
taste and touch. The unit possessing this fourfold quality 
is the paramanu, or the ultimate atom which defies analysis. 
The paramanus become perceptible when they combine. 
The perceptible atomic unit is the anu, which is a combination 
of paramanus. The atoms are the same in all the elements 
possessing the qualities of earth, air, fire and water. Though 
material things have the qualities of the four different ele- 
ments, yet it happens that in some cases some elements 
display their active energy, while others are in a potential 
condition. In hard metal the earth element, in the liquid 
stream the water element, in the burning flame the fire element 
predominates. The Sarvastivadins distinguish two worlds, 
the bhajanaloka, the universe as the abode of things, and 
the sattvaloka, the world of living beings. The first serves 
the second. The Cittaviprayukta dharmas are composite 
energies distinct from matter and mind, such as prapti and 
aprapti. They are not actual, but only potential and become 
actually existent when they attach themselves to a mental or 
a material basis. 

The non-composite elements are three : akasa, which 

is free from all distinction and limitless. It is an eternal, 
all-pervading positive substance. 3 It is, though it is devoid 
of form (rupa), and is not a material thing (vastu). 
Apratisamkhyanirodha is the non-perception of dharma, 
caused by the absence of pratyaya or conditions, and not 

* Paramanu is the minutest form of rupa. It cannot be pierced through 
or picked up or thrown away. 

1 Abhidharmamahavibhasa. J This is also the view of the Nyaya. 



618 INDIAN PHILOSOPHY 

produced by knowledge . 1 It is intense concentration on 
one subject, so that all other influences sink into silence. 
Pratisamkyanirodha is the positive fruition of transcendental 
knowledge, the highest ideal of the Sarvastivadin. The 
nirvana of this school is neither quite the same as existence 
conditioned by the skandhas nor different from it. Since 
the Vaibhasikas recognise the permanent existence of the 
atoms of the skandhas, nirvana cannot be a condition alto- 
gether independent of the skandhas. Samkara criticises 
the three non-composite or asamskrta dharmas as avastu 
(non-substantial), abhavamatram (only negatively discern- 
nible), and nirupakhya (devoid of form ). 3 It is true that 
they are indefinable, but that does not mean they are 
unreal. 

The true instruments of knowledge open to us are per- 
ception and conception. Perception (or grahana) gives us 
truth, since it is free from any imagination or kalpana. But 
it only gives us indefinite presentations. Conception or 
cognition (adhyavamya) does not give us knowledge, though 
it is definite, for it is ideal or imaginary. Perception is 
not illusory, but indefinite. Conception is illusory, though 
definite. An absolutely undetermined object of perception 
does not exist. It is indeed difficult to distinguish the given 
and the ideal aspects of the objects of knowledge. There 
seems to be an inconsistency here in the Vaibhasika theory, 
for if perception is so indefinite, how can we say that it 
gives us knowledge of the reality of things ? It may be 
that through perception we bump against reality, and feel 
that there is something real. But to ascertain the nature 
of the object with which we come into collision, inference 
is necessary. 

The perceiver or upalabdhr is vijnana and the substratum 
of consciousness (citta or mind) is permanent. Memory 
is a cittadliarma, or a quality of citta. The sense-objects 
are rupa (colour or form), taste, smell, touch and sound. 
Answering to these five sense-objects, we have five sense- 
organs. After grasping the external objects, the indriyas 
arouse the citta or mind and excite vijnana or consciousness. 
These indriyas which grasp the object are material in their 

1 Vasubandhu. 1 V.S. Commentary, ii. 2. 22-24. 



THE SCHOOLS OF BUDDHISM 


619 


nature. Each has two parts, the principal and the auxiliary. 
In the case of sight, the optic nerve is the principal and the 
eyeball is the auxiliary. There are said to be six kinds of 
discrimination according to the five sense-organs and the 
sixth mind, which is the internal sense. By means of the 
sixth sense of mind, we know not only the particular colours, 
but colour as such or sound as such. Citta, according to 
Vasubandhu, is one with mind, vijnana or discrimination. 1 
There is no soul distinct from vijnana or citta. 

According to this school Buddha is an ordinary human 
being, who, after attaining the qualified nirvana by his 
Buddhahood and final nirvana by his death, lost his being. 
The only divine element in Buddha is his intuitive knowledge 
of the truth, which he attained without the aid of others. 


Ill 

The Sautrantikas 

The second school of the Hinayana is that of the 
Sautrantikas. 2 3 The Sautrantikas admit the extra-mental 
existence of the phenomenal world. Only we do not have a 
direct perception of it. We have mental presentations 
through which we infer the existence of external objects. 
They must exist because there cannot be perception without 
an object of perception. 3 

Madhava describes the arguments by which the Sautranti- 

1 The mind is called citta because it observes (cetati), manas because 
it considers (manyatc), and vijnana because it discriminates (vijanate). 
Abhidharmakosa, 2. 

1 Of the origin of the term Sautrantika, Madhava says: "The name 
Sautrantika arose from the fact that the venerated Buddha said to some 
of his disciples, who asked what was the ultimate purport (anta) of the 
aphorism (sutra), be Sautrantikas” (S.D.S., p. 332). It may well be that 
the Sautrantikas are so called because of their adherence to the Sutta 
I’itaka, or the section consisting of the discourses of Buddha to the rejection 
of the two other Pitakas. The Sautrantikas take their stand on the sutras. 
There are two divisions among them, those who reject every other appeal 
than that to the word of the master, and those who admit other proofs. 
Kumlralabdha , a contemporary of Nagarjuna, is said to be the founder of 
the system. Dharmottara, the logician, and Yasomitra the author of the 
commentary on Yasubandhu’s Abhidharmakosa, are followers of the school 

3 Locke’s Essay, iv. 4. 3. 



620 


INDIAN PHILOSOPHY 


kas infer the existence of an external world in his Sarvadar- 
sana-samgraha : “ Cognition must ultimately have some 

object since it is manifested in duality. ... If the object 
proved were only a form of cognition, it should manifest itself 
as such, and not as an external object.” Modern logic might 
look upon this as a confusion between objectivity and exter- 
nality. If it is said that the internal principle manifests 
itself as if it were something external, the Sautrantikas reply : 
“ This is untenable, for if there be no external objects, there 
being no genesis of such, the comparison, ‘ as if they were 
external,’ is illegitimate. No man in his senses would say 
Vasumitra looks like the son of a childless mother.” 1 We 
infer the objective existence from certain properties, even 
as “ nourishment is inferred from a thriving look, as nation- 
ality from language and as emotion from expression.” 4 
Again : “ Consciousness by itself is everywhere alike, and if 
it were all, the world must be one. We have, however, 
now blue, now red. These must be due to differences in 
the objects themselves.” The varieties of forms of conscious- 
ness indicate the existence of external objects. Besides, 
“ those things which while a thing exists manifest them- 
selves only at times must depend on something else than 
that thing.” Consciousness manifests itself only at times 
as blue and so forth. Again : “ That is knowledge of the 
subject (alayavijnana) which concerns the ego. And 
that is knowledge of the object (pravrttivijnana) which 
manifests blue, etc.” Lastly, this external world does not 
rise into being at our will. To account for the involuntary 
nature of sense-perceptions, we must admit the reality of 
a world able to produce sound, touch, colour, taste, smell, 
pleasure, pain, etc. The world is therefore external to 
consciousness. Our belief in it is based on inference. We 
may ask whether its existence is so absolutely self-evident 
and demonstrable that it can resist the shock of doubt. 
As Descartes puts the objection, “ may it not be that some 
malignant spirit is playing upon our minds and awaking in 
them the ideas of things that have no reality.” We then 
seem to be brought to the Yoganara view that the immediate 
objects of consciousness of which we have any certainty 
1 p. 27. • p. 28. 



THE SCHOOLS OF BUDDHISM 621 

are our ideas. No lying spirit can deceive us about them. 
When once the unity of thought and being is broken up, 
when we separate the consciousness of self from the immediate 
consciousness of the world, both of them lose their life. 
The Madhyamika theory consistently disposes of both self 
and not-self, and leads us to an absolute unity lifted beyond 
the distinction of self and not-self. 

While holding that there can be no perceptual knowledge 
of objects without external objects, the Sautrantikas contend 
that these outer objects are only momentary. All things 
are momentary . 1 If the objects which determine the forms 
of consciousness are only momentary, how do we get the 
illusion of permanent objects? “The forms of the object 
penetrate one after the other into the understanding ; the 
illusion of simultaneity is caused by the swiftness of the 
proceeding. Just so as an arrow passes through the eight 
leaves of a flower, as it were, at the same time, and a fire- 
brand appears as a circle.” The Sautrantikas are hypo- 
thetical dualists, or cosmothetic idealists, to use Hamilton’s 
expression. They deny any immediate knowledge of an 
independent world, but admit the reality of it to account 
for our perceptions and images. Through conscious presenta- 
tions objects are apprehended. There is no doubt that so 
far as psychological fact is concerned, the Vaibhasikas are 
on better ground. When we perceive, the Sautrantika 
says we have an idea or presentation. The unsophisticated 
individual whose mind is not debauched by psychological 
learning confirms the Vaibhasika account when he says 
that he perceives a tree and not an idea from which he 
infers the tree. To import the results of psychological 
analysis into the naive mind of the experiencing individual 
is to commit the psychologist’s fallacy. The individual sees 
the tree which is not himself. To say that he apprehends 
an idea which he later refers to an external thing is a distor- 
tion of plain facts. Modern psychology confirms the Vai- 
bhasika theory that perception is an act of consciousness, 
which stands in relation to a non-mental existent physical 
object. 

Dharmottara in his Nyayabindutlka, a commentary 
■ S.S.S.S. iii. 3, if>. 



622 INDIAN PHILOSOPHY 

on Dharmakirti’s Nyayabindu, regards sariiyak-jnana or 
right knowledge as the sole means for the accomplishment 
of all desires a man may have. While the truth of a judgment 
consists in its agreement with the objects, the test of truth 
is successful activity. All knowledge is purposive. It starts 
with the presentation of an idea and terminates with the 
fulfilment of the desire that is prompted by it. As both 
perception and inference help us in the realisation of our 
desires, they are valid forms of knowledge. Only in per- 
ception, the presentation is direct, while in inference it is 
mediated by the linga or the reason. Dreams and illusions 
are examples of wrong knowledge. 

Admitting the reality of the external world, the 
Sautrantika goes on to explain the process of knowledge. 
Knowledge arises on the basis of four conditions, which 
are: (i) data, or alambana; (2) suggestion, or samanantara; 
(3) medium, or sahakari; and (4) dominant organ, or adhi- 
patirupa. “ From blue data, the form of blue arises in 
the understanding, which manifestation is styled a cognition 
(jfiana). From suggestion there is a revival of old know- 
ledge. The restriction to the apprehension of this or that 
object arises from the medium, light, as one condition and 
the dominant organ as the other.” 1 Dharmakirti, in his 
Nyayabindu, defines perception as a presentation deter- 
mined exclusively by the object and free from all mental 
impositions (kaipana). Obviously it is nirvikalpa or in- 
determinate knowledge, since savikalpa or determinate 
knowledge involves the conceptual activity of the mind. 
Dharmakirti is of opinion that names and relations are 
imposed by the mind, while the senses reveal the objects 
accurately unless they are themselves perverted by organic 
or extraneous causes. This pure perception, free from all 
traces of conceptual activity, is said to give us the object 
in its own nature (svalaksanam). It is, however, difficult 
to decide in our actual perceptions, which are by no means 
pure, what are the respective contributions of the object 
and the mind. 

The atomic theory is accepted by the Sautrantikas with 
very little difference from the Vaibhasikas. For the 

* S.D.S. p. 30. 



THE SCHOOLS OF BUDDHISM 623 

Sautrantika, akasa is tke same as the ultimate atom, since 
both are notions and nothing more. 1 

In opposition to the Vaibl.asikas and the Madhyamikas, 
the Sautrantikas maintain that thought can think itself, 
and that we can have self-consciousness. 2 Though the end 
of a finger cannot touch itself, a lamp illuminates itself 
and another. 3 This theory is quite compatible with 

realism. 

Yasomitra, the Sautrantika and the commentator of the 
Abhidharmakosa of Vasubandhu, dealing with the reality of 
God, argues: “ The creatures are created neither by Isvara, 
nor by Purusa (spirit), nor by Pradhana (matter). If God 
was the sole cause, whether the God was Mahadeva, Vasudeva 
or another, whether spirit or matter, owing to the simple 
fact of the existence of such a primordial cause, the world 
would have been created in its totality at once and at the 
same time. For it cannot be admitted that there should be 
a cause without an effect ; but we see the creatures coming 
into existence not simultaneously, but successively, some 
from wombs, some from buds. Hence we have got to 
conclude that there is a series of causes, and that God is not 
the sole cause. But it is objected that the diversity of 
causes is due to the volition of the Deity ; ‘ Let now such 
and such a creature be born, let another creature be born 
in such and such a way.’ It is in this way that is to be 
explained the phenomenon of the appearance of creatures, 
and that it is proved that God is the cause of them all. 
To this we reply that to admit several acts of volition in God 
is to admit several causes, and that to make this admission 
is to destroy the first hypothesis, according to which there 
is one primordial cause. Moreover, this plurality of causes 
could not have been produced except at one and the same 
time, since God, the source of the distinct acts of volition 
which have produced this variety of causes, is Himself alone 
and indivisible. The sons of Sakya hold that the evolution 
of the world has no beginning.” < 

1 S.S.S.S., iii. 3. 5. • Svasaravitti. 

3 Bodhicaryavatara, ix. 15. 

4 Quoted in Nariman, Literary History 0 f Sanskrit Buddhism, pp. 284— 

285. 



624 


INDIAN PHILOSOPHY 


IV 

The Yogacaras 

Aryasanga or Asariga and his younger brother Vasu- 
bandhu, the teacher of Dignaga, founded the Vijnanavada, 
or the idealist view of the Yog&cara. 1 

The school is called Yogacara, since it declares that 
the absolute truth or bodhi manifested in the Buddhas is 

1 Originally an adherent of the Sarvastivada school, Asariga became 
the chief exponent of the Yogacara doctrine. He explains his doctrine 
in his Yogucarabhumisastra, Mahayanasutralariikara, a work consisting of 
memorial verses in various metres, and a commentary on the latter by 
himself. Vasubandhu is said to have lived about the last quarter of the 
fourth century. Takakusu and Jacobi assign him to the latter part of the 
fifth century. Other opinion puts him circa a.d. 300. Vasubandhu's pupil, 
Gunaprabha, was the guru or teacher of Sri Harsa, the king of Kanouj 
and the friend of Yuan Chwang. This fact favours Jacobi’s opinion that 
Vasubandhu lived about the second half of the fifth centurv. Vasubandhu 
is distinguished for his profound learning and perverseness of thought. He 
is the author of Ablndharmakosa, a Hinayana work. In later life he was 
converted by his brother Asariga to the Mahayana doctrine, and wrote 
several commentaries on the Maha\ ana texts. Asvaghosa is also a follower 
of the Yogacara school. His chnf work is Mahayanasraddhotpada, or 
The Awakening of Faith in the Mahayana (translated by Suzuki in the 
Open Court Series). Aivaghosa’s autho ship c.f this work is not beyond 
doubt. He is a Brahmin of Eastern India, who lived in the first 
century a.d. He is said to have been the spiritual adviser of the famous 
Kusan king, Kaniska. (The date of Kaniska is unsettled, some, Boyer, 
Oldenberg, and Haraprasiid Sestri, putting it in the first century a.d. and 
others first century b.c. Sir R. G. Bhandarkar is of opinion that Kaniska 
lived in the third century a.d. J.R.A.S., Bombay Branch, vol. xx.) Asva- 
ghosa is also the author of Buddhacanta. The Lanka vatarasutra describes 
a visit paid to Ravana in Ceylon by Buddha, who answered a number of 
questions according to the doctrine of the Yogacara school. It is an 
important text oi this school, though Madhyamika tenets are not wanting 111 
it. The Abhisamayalaihkaraloka and the Bodhisattvabhumi are other works 
of the same school. Among the distinguished thinkers of this persuasion 
may be mentioned Nanda, Dignaga, Dharmapala and £ilabhadra. The 
last was Professor at Nalanda, from whom Yuan Chwang acquired the 
knowledge of Buddhist philosophy. Dignaga, the author of Nyayabindu- 
subhasitasaihgraha, Pramanasamuccaya, was a South Indian philosopher and 
pupil of Asanga or Vasubandhu. Dignaga is regarded by some as a con- 
temporary of Gunaprabha, and assigned to a.d. 520 to 600. It is not improb- 
able that Kalidasa refers to him in his Meghaduta, and if so, he must have 
flourished about the time of Kalidasa. The words are : Adrelj srrigam 
harati — dignaganam pathi panliar.ui sthulahastavalepan. Suguira says that 
Dignaga was a native of Andhra. See his Hindu Logic as preserved m China 
and Japan, p. 33. 



THE SCHOOLS OF BUDDHISM 


625 


attainable only by those who practise Yoga. The title 
Yogacara brings out the practical side of the philosophy, 
while Vijnanavada brings out its speculative features. 
The principle of critical analysis is applied not only to the 
individual ego and the material objects, but also to the 
dharmas, or the elements of things, and an idealism which 
reduces all reality to thought relations is developed. 

The representative theory of perception adopted by 
the Sautrantika takes us naturally to the subjectivism of 
the Yogacara. Our data in knowledge are a disordered 
medley, which the Sautrantikas say come to us from with- 
out, supplied by things which exist. We do not know what 
these things are. If objects of our knowledge are only 
ideas in our mind, which have a representative character, 
since they are referred to objects beyond themselves and 
are considered to be images and effects of things existing out- 
side the thinking subject, it is difficult to comprehend their 
nature. They are said to be symbolic of something beyond 
themselves. If we start with ideas unreferred, their later 
reference to objects need not be true. The existence of an 
outer world is a fiction. Even if it exists it can never be 
known. We can never get behind the screen and know 
what causes the ideas. “ Our senses testify not, but that 
we have certain ideas. And if we draw conclusions from 
the testimony which the premises will not support, we deceive 
ourselves.” 1 When the Sautrantika maintains that we 
have ideas and through them we infer things, it is clear 
that if there were external bodies we cannot know them, 
and if they were not, even then we will have as much reason 
to think they were.* If a cause is necessary for ideas, that 
cause need not necessarily be the outer w'orld. Even with 
regard to ideas which are not voluntarily produced, all 
that we can say is that there must be some cause. The 
Sautrantika does not face the consequences of his representa- 
tive theory of knowledge, since he starts with the assumption 
of two substances. 

The task of the Yogacara was like that of Berkeley, to 
expose the baseless and self-contradictory character of the 

1 Reid : Works, p. 286. 

• Berkeley : Principles 0/ Human Knowledge, section 7. 



626 INDIAN PHILOSOPHY 

unknown absolute matter of the Sautrantika, and persuade 
us to drop all ideas of such an external existence. We have 
no warrant for supposing the cause of all ideas to be material 
substance. Matter is an idea and nothing more. Things 
are clusters of sensations. The objects of knowledge are 
either ideas actually imprinted on the sense, or those per- 
ceived by attending to passions and operations of the mind. 
External objects independent of consciousness are not in- 
telligible. The Yogacaras ask : “ Does the external object 
apprehended by us arise from any existence or not ? It 
does not arise from an existence, for that which is generated 
has no permanence ; nor does it not arise from an existence, 
for what has not come into being has no existence.” 1 Again, 
“ Is the external object a simple atom or a complex body ? 
It cannot be the latter, for we do not know whether it is 
part or whole that is apprehended. It cannot be an atom, 
since it is supersensible.” We cannot cognise atoms, 
and about the aggregates of atoms we cannot say whether 
the aggregates are different or not from the atoms. If 
they are different from the atoms, they can no longer be 
regarded as composed of atoms. If they are not diiferent 
from atoms, i.e. if they are one with them, they cannot be 
the causes of the mental representations of gross bodies. 
Besides, if the objects are momentary, then they last only 
an instant, and knowledge which is an effect can arise only 
after the cause ceases to be, and so it can never arise at all. 
At the moment of cognition the object would have ceased 
to be. It comes to this, that for perceiving an object we need 
not have an object. Even if objects exist they become 
objects of knowledge through ideas which take the form of 
objects. Since the latter are all we need, there is no necessity 
to assume external objects. Since we are conscious of ideas 
and things together, the two are not different, All the 
properties we know, length, size, taste, etc., are subjective. 
There are no objects independent of us, and when we speak 
of such we use words only. Outer objects are non-existent. 
The apparent phenomena around us are produced by mental 
operations within. They appear and disappear like swiftly 
vanishing clouds. The so-called outward things, stars and 

« S.D.S., p. 24. 



THE SCHOOLS OF BUDDHISM 


627 


planets, are really mental experiences arising in an established 
order which may somehow be counted upon. 1 We read into 
external nature what exists only in our own minds. If we 
ask for the explanation for the actual varieties of ideas, the 
Yogacara refers us to the impressions left by previous ideas. 
Our dream experiences are full of ideas which arise from 
previous mental impressions without any external objects. 
Even so is waking experience to be explained. 2 All dharmas 
or things and their qualities are constituents of consciousness. 
Our consciousness by its two functions of khyati or perception 
and vastuprativikalpa or interpretation develops the world 
of experience. The Yogacara traces the activity of conscious- 
ness to the beginningless instinctive tendencies working in it.3 
The Yogacaras are supporters of Vijnanavada. They 
deny the real existence of all except vijhana or consciousness. 
"Sarvam buddhimayam jagat;” the whole world is ideal. 
Whatever we may say about the natural world said to be 
beyond, internal experience cannot be denied. Our know- 
ledge may not be a record of the truths of nature, but nobody 
can deny its existence. Knowledge is. Its presence is 
potent. This theory has the support of early Buddhism, 
which holds that all that happens is the result of thought 
and is made up of it. “ All that we are is the result of what 
we have thought ; it is founded on our thoughts ; it is made 
up of our thoughts.” The psycho-physical organism which 


1 Cf. Einstein’s theory of relativity, which makes out that even length is 
not an absolute property of the rod, but depends on the relative velocity and 
position of the rod and the observer. 

’ According to the logic of Dignaga, existence means the capacity for 
producing an effect, arthakriyakaritva. External things are not real. A 
permanent thing is inactive. Does it possess, at the moment when it was 
accomplishing its present act, the power to accomplish its past and future ? 
If so, it will accomplish them all at once. For it is not usual that anything 
capable of an act should postpone. If not, it will never accomplish them, 
as a stone which cannot produce a bird now will never produce one. If 
it is said that the permanent thing produces such and such an effect by 
reason of the co-operation of other factors, then if the factors are external, 
the latter are active ; if they give a new power to the permanent things, 
then the first being who lacked this capacity perished, and a new being 
possessing this capacity is born. It is difficult to attribute to permanent 
things identical with themselves a successive activity, so they are all 
transitory. 

J See Lafikavatara Sutra. 



628 INDIAN PHILOSOPHY 

continues after the death of a man is said to be created in 
the matrix by the rebirth of consciousness. Since the 
Yogacaras do not admit the dependence of consciousness 
on external objects and hold that it is self-subsistent, their 
view is called the Niralambanavada. The distinction of 
material and mental dharmas disappears, since all dharmas 
are mental. 

When the Madhyamika argues that even vijnana is 
unreal, since we cannot have consciousness without an object 
of which we are conscious, the Yogacara replies : “ If all 
is nothing, then nothing itself becomes the criterion of truth, 
and the Madhyamika has no right to discuss with others of a 
different way of thinking. He who accepts nothing as real can 
neither prove his position nor disprove his opponent’s case.” 1 
When the Madhyamika considers all things to be sunya or 
void, even this absence of characteristics must designate a 
something. The Bodhisattvabhumi puts it thus : ‘‘For sunya 
(vacuity) to be a justifiable position, we must have firstly 
the existence of that which is empty, and then the non- 
existence of that by the absence of which it is empty ; 
but if neither exists, how can there be a vacuity ? ” We 
wrongly superimpose the notion of a serpent on a rope. 
The rope exists, the serpent does not. Therefore the rope 
is void of serpent. Similarly, the qualities and characteristics 
as form, etc., commonly attributed to things may not exist. 
Though the denotable properties may not exist, the substra- 
tum exists. The distinctions of jnana and jneya, knowledge 
and knowable, are based on something. The simile of a 
dream is used to illustrate this position. The visions of 
a dream are independent of anything to be seen. The 
elephants we see in a dream do not exist. They are products 
of mind wrongly made objective. The form akrti of elephant 
is taken by the thought under the influence of the impression 
(vasana) left by the visual knowledge. Even the knowledge 
that we touch an elephant is a knowledge assumed by thought. 
Since there is really no knowable, there is really no knowledge. 
There is no matter rupa, nothing outside the thought, yet for 
all these imaginary entities also there must be some sub- 
stratum, and that accoiding to the Yogacaras is vijnana. 

1 S.S.S.S., iii. 3-4. 



THE SCHOOLS OF BUDDHISM 629 

The Yogacaras are frankly idealistic. What is, is merely 
one homogenous vijnana, which is not an abstract, but a 
concrete reality. The thinking being becomes conscious of 
its existence and identity of the subject only by knowing 
objects. The whole system of facts is placed within the 
individual consciousness. The alaya, with its internal duality 
of subject and object, becomes itself a little world. It is 
confined to its own circle of modifications. The world of 
reality is deprived of its independence and reduced to a mere 
dance of ideas or thought relations. The alaya, which is a 
continually changing stream of consciousness, is contrasted 
with Atman, which is immutable, though the Yogacaras are 
not clear about the exact significance of the alaya. The 
alaya is sometimes the actual self, developing and ever-grow- 
ing. 1 It receives impressions and develops the germs deposited 
in it by karma, or experience, and is continually active. It is 
not merely the superficial self, but the great storehouse of con- 
sciousness which the yogins find out by meditation. Through 
meditation and other practices of self-examination, we realise 
that our waking or superficial consciousness is a fragment of a 
wider whole. Every individual has in him this vast whole 
of consciousness, the great tank, of the contents of which 
the conscious self is not fully aware. 2 Our personal con- 
sciousness knows but a small fraction of the sum total of our 
conscious states, the alayavijnana. There are indications 
that the alayavijnana was sometimes used in the sense of 
the absolute self. It is said to be without any origination, 
existence and extinction, utpadasthitibhangavarjam. 3 It 
is the permanent background of the endless variety of feelings 
and ideas, common to all minds. It alone exists ; indi- 
vidual, intellectual products are mere phenomena, phases of 
the alaya. It is the sole foundation of the false belief in 
the existence of the world. All things in the universe are 
in it. Particular phenomena are manifestations of the alaya 
according to the number and nature of the conditions. We 

* Cf. Gentile’s neo-idealism with its insistence on thought and the his- 
torical character of reality. 

1 The Yogacaras accepted the doctrine of the subconscious which 
William James has called the most important step taken by psychology 
in recent years. 

I Lahkavatara Sutra. 



630 INDIAN PHILOSOPHY 

in our ignorance break up this consciousness into several 
elements. “ What is of the nature of consciousness is indeed 
indivisible, but by those whose vision is confused it seems to 
be, as it were, differentiated into the perceived object, the 
perceiving subject and the perception itself.” 1 Again, “ there 
exists in reality only one thing, and that is of the nature of 
the intelligent principle of consciousness, and its oneness is 
not destroyed by the varied character of its manifestations.” 2 
Mana, the means of knowledge, meya, the object of know- 
ledge, and phala, the resulting knowledge, are distinctions 
within the whole of vijnana. Objects arise from the succes- 
sive modifications of mind. The Lankavatara Sutra says : 
“ Cittam exists; not the objects perceptible by sight. 
Through objects visually cognised, cittam manifests itself in 
body in one’s objects of enjoyment, residence, etc. It is called 
the alaya of men.” Vijnana constitutes the whole universe. 
Things of nature are only the other of it. Vijnana is the 
whole, itself and the other. We see the gradual transition 
from the psychological to the logical self. All things are 
related to vijnana. There is nothing outside thought. 
There cannot be any absolute opposition between thinking 
subject and the world of objects which he thinks. Thought 
is the beginning and the end of all knowledge. Remove 
thought, all will vanish into nothing. The individual who 
thinks is not merely an individual, he is part of all he knows, 
and all he knows is part of him. The reality outside know- 
ledge, the thing in itself of Kant, is a creation of the mind. 
The idea of something else behind thought causing it, is 
simply another thought and no more. Thought is the 
only reality we have to reckon with. It is that which knows 
and the object which it knows. If this is the view of the 
Yogacara, then the external world becomes a negation 
or the non-ego, which a thinking being sets up within, and 
in conflict with which it attains to consciousness. The 
priority and productivity of thought is the central thesis 
here Thought is the structure as well as the stuff of reality. 
It presupposes no datum or reality external to itself, call 
it what you will, space or nature. It knows only so far 
as it thinks itself to be the object of its knowledge. Thought 
* S.S.S.S., iii. 2—4. ■ S.S.S.S., iii. 2-6. 



THE SCHOOLS OF BUDDHISM 


631 


contains everything in itself. If the object constituted by 
the subject detaches itself from the subject, and shuts itself 
up in impenetrability, then it is eviscerated of its reality. 
In this sense thought is no other than God. The Yogacara, 
when he teaches the immanent existence of all things in 
vijnana, when he makes out that the alaya is common to 
all individuals, that while the phenomenal self differs, the 
transcendental self is the same in all, is adopting this view. 
Alaya vijnana is the absolute totality, originality and crea- 
tivity, unconditioned itself by time and space, which are 
modes of existence of the concrete and empirical individuality. 
Things of nature are deposits from the great sea of thought. 
They can all be taken back into its transparent unity and 
simplicity, which is the mother sea of consciousness, out 
of which things arise and into which they again return. It 
is the living base from which come the members which again 
withdraw themselves. It is the highest or perfect knowledge 
in which no thing is known, no difference is felt. It is 
always the same, and therefore perfect. Alaya becomes 
the universal subject, and not the empirical self. 

While then, metaphysically, all is due to the one reality 
which is thought, the Yogacaras sometimes reduce the 
matter opposed to the empirical individual to a mere 
sensation or collection of sensations. The world is not 
merely the contents of this or that consciousness. Solidity, 
distance, hardness and resistance are not mere ideas of 
the finite mind. By maintaining that they are, the 
Yogacara’s view becomes crudely subjectivist. It cannot 
account for the world organism which precedes the birth of 
human consciousness. Nor can it account for the seeming 
reality of a common world which renders our ordinary life 
possible. While we are willing to admit that it was not the 
intention of the Yogacara school to make the world of 
space and time dependent or contingent on individual 
consciousness, yet we cannot help saying that, in their eager- 
ness to refute naive realism, they confused psychological 
and metaphysical points and countenanced a crude mentalism. 
The confusion is increased by the employment of the same 
term, vijnana, to indicate both the changing and the un- 
changing aspects of mental life. We have the skandha 



632 INDIAN PHILOSOPHY 

vijnana, which is a phenomenal effect of karma, and the 
alayavijnana, which is the ever active, continuous, spiritual 
energy dwelling in all. The reality of the world depends 
on the latter. An absolute consciousness must exist for the 
objects to exist and be known. This does not mean that 
the world is mere consciousness. Yet such an inference 
is often made by the Yogacaras. 

The Yogacaras threw overboard the easy-going assump- 
tion of the realists who looked on mind as a self-contained 
thing confronted in experience by other self-contained 
things. Going behind the two substances of matter and 
mind, they tried to discover a comprehensive reality including 
the two. With true insight they recognised that what is 
really constructive of the object world is intelligence or 
vijnana, which is more than merely individual. Within 
this vijnana arises the distinction between subject and 
object. The alayavijnana is the foundational fact of reality 
revealing itself in individual minds and things. The 
distinction between subject and object is a distinction 
made by knowledge itself within its own field, and not a 
relation between two independent entities, as the Vaib- 
ha§ikas and the Sautrantikas assumed. The alayavijnana 
is the whole containing within itself, the knower and the 
known. Unfortunately, we notice the tendency to identify 
the alayavijnana with skandhavijnana, which is only a 
property of the finite mind. If foundational knowledge 
is confused with the activities of particular subjects in 
space and time, we are upon the slope which leads to the 
precipice of scepticism. Almost all the non-Buddhist critics 
of the Yogacara theory overlook the element of truth 
contained in it (albeit overlaid with a mass of error) and 
repudiate it as mere mentalism. 

fsarhkara criticises the theory that the world has no 
existence except in the human mind on several grounds. 
It fails to account for the variety of perception. How can 
we account for the sudden noise when we are enjoying a 
sunset ? To say that things and ideas are presented 
together does not mean that they are one. Inseparable con- 
nection is different from identity. If all cognitions are empty 
of content, then the consciousness that there are no things 



THE SCHOOLS OF BUDDHISM 633 

is also empty. The comparison of waking to dream is due 
to a confusion. Dream experience is subjective and private, 
while the waking is not so. Objects of waking knowledge 
endure, while dream objects last only during dreams. Samkara 
argues that there is a real difference between dreaming 
and waking. We may dream of travelling great distances, 
and if the two, dreaming and waking, were identical, then we 
should get up at the place to which we have travelled, not 
as we actually do at the same place where we were when 
we began to dream. If it is said that the two are not con- 
tinuous, and it is open to us to infer the falsity of dreams 
from waking, as much as waking from dreams, Sarhkara 
replies, that since waking experience is the one experience 
which affects us practically, we infer that dreams are false. 
If the Buddhist seems to infer the falsity of the waking world, 
he must have access to some experience to contradict the 
waking one. If he admits any such higher experience 
he would allow that there is something permanent after all, 
and so the momentariness theory vanishes and Vedantism 
is established. We cannot perceive non-existent things. 
Sarhkara takes his stand on psychological facts. “ We are 
always conscious of something,” and not merely conscious. 
Nobody when perceiving a post or a wall is conscious of 
his perception only. We are conscious of the object of 
perception, a post or a wall. A dream chair is not part 
of the dreaming mind any more than the chair on which 
we sit in waking life is part of the mind of the sitter. To 
be dependent on mind is not to be a part of mind. The 
statement that the perceptual consciousness takes on the 
form of the thing cognised so that we are never conscious 
of a thing, but only of a form belonging to our consciousness, 
is according to £amkara absurd. If from the start there 
were no objects, he asks, how could perception take on the 
form of objects ? It is because objects exist that conscious- 
ness is able to take on their form. Otherwise consciousness 
would be free to take on any form it pleased. If it is said 
that our consciousness of things as external is illusory, that 
we see objects as if they were external, whereas in reality 
they are not, Saiiikara asks, if really there were nothing 
external, how can we have even an illusion of externality ? 



634 


INDIAN PHILOSOPHY 


If there were no such thing as a snake at all, if we did not 
know of it, we could not imagine it in the rope. Therefore 
external objects must exist . 1 

Kumarila argues that there is a distinction between 
waking and dreaming “ For us, dream cognition is certainly 
falsified by the perception of the waking cognition contra- 
dicting it. While for you, what would constitute the difference 
between the reality of waking cognition and dream conscious- 
ness, both of which you hold to be equally false ? ” 2 To 
the objection that the waking cognitions are invalidated 
by the insight of the yogis, Kumarila says : “ Such yogic 
cognition is not found to belong to any person in this life ; 
and as for those who have reached the yogic state, we know 
not what happens to them. ”3 If the Niralambanavadin 
cites the Nyaya theory in his support to the effect that 
judgment and inference are explained by it on the basis of 
ideas of subject and predicate of the constituent propositions, 
and that these do not necessitate the external reality of objects, 
Kumarila replies that the Nyaya accepts the reality of external 
objects and proceeds on that basis.4 To trace the differences 
of ideas to impressions leads us to anyonyasraya, or mutual 
dependence and infinite regress. We can have no differen- 
tiation of the pure form of the idea. Vasana or impression 
brings about a distinction in the apprehender, but not in 
the object apprehended,5 and vasana itself is inexplicable. 
“ Ideas being momentary and their dispersion total (leaving 
no trace behind), there being no association of the impressed 
and the impresser (since the two do not in any case appear 
together), there can be no vasana.” The two moments not 
being together cannot be related by way of impression. Even 
if they were together, they could not be related, since both are 
momentary and cannot operate on each other. 6 If properties 
of previous cognitions persist in subsequent ones, we cannot 
say that they are destroyed totally. It is the need for a 
permanent consciousness, which is capable of impressions 
and preserving the vasanas, that makes the Yogacaras 


* See also Udayana : Atmatattvaviveka. 

* v. 3. 88-S9. Slokavarttika. 

3 93-94- 4 167 - 175 - 

I 180-1. * 182-5. 



THE SCHOOLS OF BUDDHISM 


635 


look upon alaya as a permanent entity, yet they are obliged 
by their Buddhist presuppositions to look upon it as ever 
changing. Hence the unsatisfactoriness of the Yogacara 
doctrine. Saiiikara’s criticism hits off the point well. Unless 
there exists one continuous principle which cognises every- 
thing, we cannot account for knowledge. If alayavijnana 
is looked upon as the permanent self, the distinctive feature 
of Buddhism that there is nothing permanent .is gone. The 
philosophical impulse led the Yogacaras to the Upanisad 
theory, while the Buddhist presuppositions made them halt- 
ing in their acceptance of it. 

The Yogacaras, however, felt that reducing the world to 
a mere relation of ideas would be to deprive reality of all its 
meaning. The phenomenal existence of the world with its 
distinction of subject and object is accepted by them. 
Madhava writes : “ Nor must it be supposed that on this hypo- 
thesis, the juice, the energy and the digestion derivable from 
an imaginary and an actual sweetmeat will be the same.” 1 
This reminds us of Kant’s famous distinction between the 
imaginary and the real hundred dollars. Psychologically 
the Yogacaras admit the distinction of subject and object. 
But critical analysis reveals to them that these are all differ- 
ences within a whole which the Yogacara identifies with 
vijnana or thought. The empirical self finds an object over 
against itself, without which its own conscious life is not 
possible. That which the empirical self finds given is not for 
the absolute, a mere contingent datum. The w r orld is as 
real as the particular self and independent of it, though 
dependent upon the universal consciousness. We need 
hardly point out how very similar the latter view of the alaya- 
vijnana is to the philosophy of Fichte, which looks upon all 
experience as that of a self-conscious subject. To him the 
self is both act and product in one. The ego affirms or 
posits itself, and it does so by op-positing or distinguishing 
from itself a non-ego. By this process of limitation or negation 
the ego brings into being the element of otherness. The 
absolute ego differentiates into a multiplicity of finite egos 
at once other than itself and modes of itself. 

The world in space and time appears to be real, because 
» S.D.S., p. 26. 

21 


VOL. I 



636 INDIAN PHILOSOPHY 

of our imperfect apprehension. Our intellect, though funda- 
mentally free from the modes of subject and object, still, 
thanks to the succession of unreal ideas or to the beginningless 
predispositions, 1 develops diverse distinctions between the 
percipient and the percept. Our buddhi is twofold, cog- 
nitional and non-cognitional. The former leads to a correct 
apprehension of truth, the latter which is dependent on a 
fundamental insensitiveness is evolved out of the skandhas, 
ayatanas and the dhatus (or the material components of the 
body), and is the source of avidya, and is not an authoritative 
criterion of truth. 3 Every individual has the vijnana in 
which the germs of all things exist in their ideality. The 
objective world does not exist in reality, but by means of the 
subjective illusion created by avidya the individual projects 
the germs in the alayavijiiana to the outside world, and 
imagines that they are as they seem to him to be. We have 
again subjectivism here, since the objective world is reduced 
to mind stuff. “ In the all-conserving consciousness or 
alaya, avidya obtains, and from non-enlightenment starts 
that which sees, that which represents, that which appre- 
hends and the objective world, and that which constantly 
particularises.” 3 The empirical ego comes from a com- 
mingling of the alaya with avidya, and this empirical ego 
has for its correlate the empirical world, and both are pheno- 
menal and are transcended in the alaya. The metaphysical 
is the truth of the psychological. 

All thoughts excepting those of a Buddha have a three- 
fold nature or character : (i) the imagined nature (parikalpita), 
(2) dependent or caused nature (paratantra), and (3) absolute 
or metaphysical nature (parinispanna). Our dream experi- 
ences come in the first class. Thought externalises itself 
in the form of dream figures. Such wrongly objectified 
objects of cognition are the bodily organs, things known 
by them and the material universe. In the idea of the ego, 
ahamdrsti, thought presents itself to itself, »as object 
and subject of cognition. From the opposition of duality 
arise the so-called categories of being, non-being, essence, 

1 Ana divas ana vasat (S.D.S., ii. 26). 

• S.S S.S., iii. 4. 6-7. 

I Asvagho^a: Awakening of Faith, p. 75. 



THE SCHOOLS OF BUDDHISM 637 

etc. The dual nature results from the fact that we consider 
the so-called objects which are only forms of thought to be 
external and existing in themselves, even as a dreamer 
believes in the reality of dream elephants when he notices 
them. This duality has no metaphysical reality, but is a 
product of imagination, parikalpa or vikalpa, which imposes 
on thought the categories of subject and object. But whence 
do thoughts derive their origin ? What is the law according 
to which they appear in an ordered succession ? They are 
not produced by the external objects of the realists. Nor 
are they due to an immutable Atman, as the Vedantins argue, 
nor are they autonomous. Thoughts are dependent one upon 
another. M. Poussin writes : “ All the Buddhist philosophers, 
maintainors of the doctrine of karma, had to admit that 
thoughts, although momentary, do not perish altogether, 
but originate new thoughts, sometimes after a long interval 
of time. As long as they believed in the existence of matter 
and considered man as a physico-psychical complex, it 
was not difficult for them to explain the interdependence 
of thoughts.” The six classes of cognitions had a material 
support and exterior excitements, and it was possible to 
explain all the psychological facts, including memory, with 
these six cognitions. But the idealists had to work out a 
system of psychology without the hypothesis of any material 
element. They say “ that the cognitions acknowledged by 
the realist schools, visual . . . mental cognitions create seeds 
(bija), which will ripen in due time without any interference 
except for the power of the bodhisattvas into new visual . . . 
mental cognitions. Now these seeds are not a part of the 
visual . . . mental cognitions which arise in succession between 
the sowing and the ripening of the seeds; for example, the 
cognition of blue which will emerge to-morrow in a certain 
series of cognitions named ‘ I ’ depends on yesterday’s 
cognitions of belief. But its seed is not to be found in any 
of the cognitions of which I am conscious to-day. There- 
fore we must add to the sixfold cognition of the primitive 
psychology another group of cognitions which the modern 
philosopher would style unconscious or subliminal images ; 
these are the seeds of actual cognition ; they are created 
by actual cognition ; beside and below the actual cognition, 



638 INDIAN PHILOSOPHY 

they flow as a series of momentary subliminal images which 
proceed, owing to an uninterrupted self-reproduction ; this 
series bears the old supply of seeds, is enlarged by the sowing 
of new seeds, and will stop when the series have borne fruit 
and no new seeds sown.” 1 If no new seed is sown and the 
old stock is exhausted, we pass beyond the second stage 
of knowledge and reach the third, called parnispanna. 
The duality of subject and object is realised to be accidental 
to thought, being produced by the misconception of imagina- 
tion. To know thought in its metaphysical aspect, duality 
has to be overcome. True, when once it is freed from duality 
it becomes ununderstandable, beyond expression. No char- 
acter (visesa) can be predicated of it ; it can be said only to 
exist (bhavati eva). It is therefore defined as vastumatra, 
simply thing, or cittamatra, mere thought. 

It is open to us to look upon parikalpitasatya as positive 
error, as when we mistake a rope for a snake ; paratantrasatya 
as relative knowledge, as when we recognise a rope as a rope ; 
and parinispannasatya as metaphysical insight, as when 
we recognise that rope is a mere concept and has no being 
as a thing in itself. Nagarjuna reduces the first two to one, 
samvrti satya, and calls the third paramartha. Parikalpita 
is the illusory knowledge of Kant, which is purely subjective, 
being unconditioned by the categories. It cannot stand 
critical judgment and has no practical efficiency. Paratantra 
is the empirical knowledge of Kant, relative and conditioned. 
Through this categorised knowledge the absolute reality, 
free from all conditions, cannot be known. It is possible 
for us to rise to the metaphysical insight since the one 
universal dwells in all. It exists whole and undivided in 
every single thing, entirely free from all forms of the pheno- 
mena. Plurality is possible because of subjection to time 
and space, which are the principles of individuation. The 
alaya is free from diversity, though its phenomena are innu- 
meiable in space and time. The highest state which trans- 
cends all opposites, in which the positive and the negative 
are one and the same (bhavabhavasamanata), is called 
by the Yogacaras tathata, or pure being. 3 

Agreeing with the realists, the Yogacaras divide all 

1 E.R.E., vol. ix., p 8 j<">. • See Mahayanasutralamkara. 



THE SCHOOLS OF BUDDHISM 639 

things in the universe into the two groups of samskrta, or 
composite, and asamskrta, or non-composite. The composite 
dharmas are also similarly divided as in the realist schools, 
though in them the first place is given to rupa, or matter, 
while the Yogacaras give it to citta, or mind. Citta or 
mind is the ultimate source of all things. This citta has 
two aspects, laksana or phenomenal, bhava or noumenal. 
The former deals with its changeableness, the latter with 
its immutability. It has two functions, attending to objects 
and receiving impressions. Altogether its dharmas are 
eight, the five dependent on the sense-organs, the sixth of 
the internal sense, the seventh of vijnana which speaks of 
them, and the eighth of the alayavijnana. 1 

The asamskrta dharmas are six : Akasa is the limitless, 
free from all change, which is identified with mere being; 
Pratisamkhyanirodha is the cessation of all kinds of klcsas 
or sorrows, attained through the power of perfect knowledge ; 
Apratisamkhyanirodha is cessation acquired without the 
aid of perfect knowledge. Acala is the state of disregard for 

* Satiikara says : " With reference to this doctrine we malce the following 
remarks : * Those two aggregates, constituting two different classes, and 
having two different causes which the Buddhists assume, viz., the aggregate 
of the elements and elementary things whose cause the atoms are, and the 
aggregate of the five skandhas, cannot, on Buddhist principles, be estab- 
lished, i.e. it cannot be explained how the aggregates are brought about. 
For the parts constituting the (material) aggregates are devoid of intelligence, 
and the kindling of intelligence depends on an aggregate of atoms having 
been brought about previously. And the Buddhists do not admit any 
other permanent intelligent being, such as either an enjoying soul or a ruling 
lord, which could effect the aggregation of the atoms. Nor can the atoms 
and skandhas be assumed to enter on activity on their own account, for 
that would imply their never ceasing to be active. Nor can the cause of 
aggregation be looked for in the so-called abode (i.e. the alayavijrana 
pravaha, the train of sclf-cognition), for the latter must be described either 
as different from the single cognitions or as not different from them. In 
the former case it is either permanent, and then it is nothing else but the 
permanent soul of the Vedantins ; or non-permanent, then being admitted 
to be momentary merely, it cannot exercise any influence and cannot there- 
fore be the cause of motion of the atoms. And in the latter case we are 
no further advanced than before. For all these reasons the formation of 
aggregates cannot be accounted for. But without aggregates there would 
be an end of the stream of mundane existence, which presupposes these 
aggregates.* ** ( Commentary on Vedanta- Sutras, edited by G. Thibaut, pp. 

403—4.) Avidya is no explanation of the formation of aggregates, for How 
can it be the cause of that without which as its abode it is not capable oi 
existence ? Besides, the notion of causality is itself unintelligible. 



640 INDIAN PHILOSOPHY 

all power and pleasure, and Samjnavedananirodha is that 
where vedana (feeling) and sariijna (perception) do not 
act. These five are not independent, but are different names 
conventionally employed to denote the noumenal aspect of 
the universe. We may call them the different stages by 
which the highest reality can be attained. Dharmapala 
says : “ All these five conventional terms are given to several 
stages of manifestation and parts of pure being.” This takes 
us to the true metaphysical absolute of the Yogacara school, 
viz., tathata. “ This is the transcendental truth of every- 
thing, and is termed tathata, because its essential nature 
is real and eternal. Its nature is beyond the reach of language. 
It is indefinable .” 1 Lest we mistake it for nothingness, it 
is called bhava, or existence. Asanga says : “ It can neither 
be called existence nor non-existence. It is neither such 
nor otherwise. It is neither born nor destroyed. It neither 
increases nor decreases. It is neither purity nor filth. 
Such is the real laksana or nature of the transcendental 
truth.” 

Pure being or tathata is also called alayavijnana, in 
its dynamic aspect, when it is combined with the principle 
of individuation or negativity. The moment we make 
pure being into vijnana or cit, we introduce the element 
of individualism. The alaya has difference eternally in 
its own heart. We have the self-realising consciousness, 
an absolute of the Hegelian type . 3 The moment we descend 
from the absolute being to the alayavijnana we get in 
addition to consciousness a principle of space, in addition 
to being a non-being. Space is nothing but a mode of 
particularisation, and has no real existence of its own. The 
whole phenomenal world is due to the particularisation of 
the confused mind. If the confusion clears up, the modes 
of relative existence vanish. Space is real and eternal in 

* Vasubandhu. 

* " That there is one spiritual self-conscious being of which all that is 
real is the activity or expression ; that we are related to the spiritual being, 
not merely as parts of the world which is its expression, but as partakers 
in some inchoate measure of the self-consciousness through which it at once 
constitutes and distinguishes itself from the world ; that this participation 
is the source of morality and religion ; this we take to be the vital truth 
which Hegel had to teach.” (T H. Green : Works, vol. iii., p. 146.) 



THE SCHOOLS OF BUDDHISM 


641 


a limited sense. 1 The contingent appearances traceable 
to avidya do not affect the pure spirit. We seem to have 
what later Vedanta calls vivartavada, or phenomenalism. 
“ The appearance of duality in the unity of cognition is 
an illusion.” 1 Again : “ The internal principle manifests 
itself as if it were external.” 3 The one truth is seen in the 
form of a world through the force of avidya. We cannot say 
in what sense all things are in the absolute. If all are in it, 
there is no meaning in development. If they are not, if 
the absolute produces them, then it cannot remain unaffected 
by what it produces. The avidya which is the cause of all ex- 
perience, which obtains the moment we have the alayavijhana, 
cannot be accounted for. “ Though all modes of consciousness 
and mentation are products of avidya, avidya is in its ulti- 
mate nature identical and not identical with enlightenment. In 
one sense it is destructible, in another it is not.” 4 Enlighten- 
ment and non-enlightenment are one, as all kinds of pottery, 
though different are made of the same clay.” 5 Tathata 
is the first principle. Alaya with avidya comes next. Next 
we have the empirical subjects and objects, which grow 
feeding upon each other. 

Every individual has in him the higher principle bound 
up with a selfish individuality. Individuality dings to us 
so long as we are subject to avidya. The differences among 
men are due to the force of ignorance. “ Though all beings 
uniformly have the same quality, yet in intensity, the ignor- 
ance or principle of individuation, that works from all eternity, 
varies in such manifold grades so as to outnumber the sands 
of the Ganges.” 6 Samsara is the going on or pravrtti of 
the particularising tendency due to the defilement of our 
thought. V asanas, or tendencies, and karma, or work, keep 
up uninterruptedly the continuance of the circuit. Alaya, 
or citta, is the source of the objects we perceive, and has 
in it potencies determined by our past conduct which are 
bound to develop. All dharma, pain, pleasure, good and 
bad conduct, are the outer manifestations of the potential 
seeds stored in the alaya. Some of these seeds are full 


■ Suzuki, p. 107. 
* Suzuki, p. 67. 


1 S D.S., p. 27. 

J Ibid., pp. 73-74- 


1 Ibid. 

4 Ibid., p. 80. 



642 


INDIAN PHILOSOPHY 


of defilement, 1 and so make for samsara. Others are free 
from defilement, 2 and so tend to liberation. It is the presence 
of the transcendental element that helps us to think of higher 
ideas. 

But the mere presence of the absolute will not lead to 
liberation. A distinction is made between raison d’etre 
(hetu) and cause (pratyaya). The combustible nature of the 
wood is the raison d’etre of the fire ; but we must set fire to 
it, or it will not burn. Even so, though the presence of the 
absolute may be the raison d'etre of salvation, still the practice 
of wisdom and virtue is necessary. Asanga writes : “By 
not clinging to wealth or pleasures, by not cherishing any 
thoughts to violate the precepts, by not feeling dejected 
in the face of evils, by not awakening any distraction or 
indolence of attention while practising goodness, by main- 
taining serenity of mind in the midst of disturbance and con- 
fusion of the world, and finally by always practising single- 
mindedness (ekacitta) and by the right comprehension of 
the nature of things, the bodhisattvas recognise the truth of 
vijnanamatra, the truth of the origin of all in conscious- 
ness.” The Yogacaras practise yoga. Yoga helps us to 
acquire intuitive insight. Discursive understanding gives us 
dependent or empirical knowledge. The metaphysical truth 
requires yogic discipline. When the mind is clear of all 
prejudice or illusion, it reflects the truth.3 

Nirvana is purification of mind, its restoration to its primi- 
tive simplicity or radiant transparency. " When by con- 
stancy of reflection we rid ourselves of all prejudgments, 
there arises knowledge freed from the illusions which take 
the form of objects, and this is called Mahodaya, the grand 
exaltation or emancipation. ”4 The Vijnanamatra Sastra 
distinguishes four kinds of nirvana, (i) Nirvana is a 
synonym for dharmakaya, the undefiled essence present in 


* Sasravabija. • Anasravabija. 

3 See the la-st book of Spinoza’s Ethics, where he makes out that the infinite 
in man whose essence is light and harmony will be liberated from the world 
of darkness and discord, when the passions are subdued. So long as the 
mind is th„ prey of passions, it mistakes the unreal for the real. When the 
fluctuations of mind which arise from these passions are destroyed, the 
intuition of the true “ existence of tilings ” becomes possible. 

* S.D.S., p. 26. 



THE SCHOOLS OF BUDDHISM 


643 


all things. This nirvana is possessed by every sentient indi- 
vidual, pure and spotless, in its native being. (2) Upadhisesa 
nirvana, or that which has some residue left. It is a state 
of relative being which, though freed from all affection, 
all hindrance, is still under the fetters of materiality which 
cause suffering and misery. (3) Anupadhistsa nirvana, or 
that which has no residue. It is a complete liberation 
from all fetters. (4) The nirvana which means absolute 
enlightenment, and has for its object the benefiting of others, 
is the highest kind of nirvana. 

While the Yogacara theory did a great service to the 
science of logic, by pointing out the necessity of thought for 
all reality, it betrayed its weakness by its frequent denial 
of all non-mental reality and experience. The use of the 
term alayavijnana is too indefinite. It is sometimes con- 
sidered a synonym for tathata, when it is identified with 
vastumatra, the mere abstraction of being, the pure exist- 
entiality, the Hegelian Seyn, the ultimate which remains 
when we abstract from every fact and form of existence. 
Again, it is considered to be a phenomenon of the mind 
including other phenomena in its scope. It is also the 
cosmic mind with the principle of negativity in it. Some- 
times it is equated with the stream of consciousness within 
the individual. The indefiniteness of the theory on such a 
central issue has exposed it to a good deal of legitimate 
criticism. 


V 

The Madhyamikas 1 

The Madhyamika philosophy is an ancient system which 
can be traced to the original teaching of Buddha. Buddha 
called his ethical teaching the Middle (madhyama) Way, and 

1 Of the Madhyamika philosophy, the main text is the Miidhyamika 
Sutras of Nagarjuna, a South Indian Brahmin, who, according to Kunu- 
rajiva who translated his biography into Chinese in a.d. 401, lived about the 
middle of the second century a.d., though the tradition of his system may 
be assigned to the first century of the Chtistian era. There is al.~o a view 
that Nagarjuna lived in the first century before Christ. Sarat Chandra 
Das is of opinion (see Indian Pundits in the Land of Snow, p. 15) that 
Nagarjuna converted Dhorabhadra, who lived in 56 b.c., to Buddhism, if 

VOL. I 21 s 



644 


INDIAN PHILOSOPHY 


repudiated the two extremes of an exaggerated asceticism 
and an easy secular life. In metaphysics he condemned all 
extreme positions, such as that everything exists, or that 
nothing exists. The Madhyamika philosophy tries to adopt 
the mean between extreme affirmation and extreme negation. 
We have in Nagarjuna one of the greatest thinkers of India, 
a far more vigorous sifting of the contents of experience 
than we found in either the subjectivists or the realists 
He is sustained by an unselfish intellectual enthusiasm and 
philosophical ardour, which aim at thoroughness and com- 
pleteness for their own sake. His philosophy is nearer 
now to scepticism, now to mysticism. His scepticism is due 
to his realising the essential relativity of thought. Yet he 
has faith in an absolute standard of reality. His scepticism 
is Buddhistic, while his absolutism derives from the Upani- 
sads. In the true philosophic spirit Nagarjuna reveals the 
paradoxes which our everyday consciousness veils by means 
of a more or less thoughtless phraseology and indifference 
to reflection. The Yogacara suggests the relational view of 
reality from which Nagajuna develops his scepticism. But 
the positive part of his philosophy is not different from the 
Advaitic interpretation of the Upanisad view. It is a serious 
mistake to suppose that we have in Nagarjuna only a revival 


the account of Indian history preserved in the Archives of the Dalailama 
are to be believed. The Chinese traveller Yuan Chwang holds that Nagar- 
juna lived in Southern Kosalt, 400 years after the death of Buddha, and 
obtained supreme enlightenment as a bodhisattva. Dr. Vidyabhusan 
places Nagarjuna about a.d. 300. In no case could he have been later than 
a.d. 401, when Kumarajiva translated the life of Nagarjuna into Chinese. 
Moreover, Nagarjuna assumes a knowledge of the definitions of the sixteen 
categories as given in the Nyaya Sutras, and wrote a treatise on the pra- 
manas. In it Nagarjuna reduced the syllogism of five members into one 
of three. In another work on logic, called Upayakausalyahrdaya 6astra, 
we find a clear exposition of the art of debate. In the VigrahavyavartanI 
Klrika, Nagarjuna criticises the Nyaya theory of pramanas, and perhaps 
\ atsyayana knew Nagarjuna’s views. The Sanskrit Commentary on the 
Madhyamika Sutras which we possess is by Candraklrti, who probably lived 
in the first half of the seventh century a.d. Santideva, of the seventh 
century a.d., is named sometimes among the Madhyamikas and at other 
times among the Yogacaras. In his works, Bodhicaryavatara, Siksasamuccaya, 
ho recognises two kinds of truth, samvrti and paramartha, and accepts the 
doctrine of sunya. “ Make thy merit sure by deeds full of the spirit of 
tenderness and the iunva ” (6iksasamuccaya, v. 21). The other systems of 
thought criticise the Madhyamika theory. 



THE SCHOOLS OF BUDDHISM 


645 


of the Upanisad doctrine. He seems to draw his inspira- 
tion from the Upanisads, though his philosophy is developed 
within the shadow of and with special reference tc the 
Buddhistic views. The result is a type of thought which 
has never existed before, though it is supposed to be derived 
from the Prajnaparamita. It is perhaps better to point 
out that the general view places the Sunyavada earlier than 
the Vijnanavada, though one can never be sure of it. The 
two perhaps developed side by side. Anyway, our order of 
treatment helps us to see the logical relations of the two 
systems. 


VI 

Theory of Knowledge 

If we cannot pass from perceptions to the objects they 
are supposed to refer or represent, how can we pass beyond 
perceptions to a self-consciousness which is said to perceive ? 
We cannot credit thought with a reality which we deny to the 
external world, since both are groups of passing phenomena. 
We do not know what consciousness is apart from seeing, 
feeling, willing, etc. Substance is not different from attributes. 
Were it so, it is beyond apprehension. There is, therefore, 
no need to look upon the external world as a phenomenon 
of the internal, or make the subject all-pervasive. The 
Yogacaras accounted for the empirical world by positing a 
continuous subject. The argument is pushed a step beyond 
this and the very shadow of the soul is given up. If the 
Yogacaras are right, then there are no objects to be known. 
Even Vijnana cannot exist if there are no objects to be 
known . 1 No object means no subject. Thus the Madhya- 
mika abolishes the constant alaya and sets the stream of 
ideas adrift. If there are no objective relations discoverable, 
there is no world at all. External objects as well as internal 
states are both void, sunya. The Madhyamika says that 
we are dreaming even when we are awake. Through 
the pressure of logic, the Madhyamika infers the final in- 
explicability of subject and object. The explanations of 
science and common sense which assume their validity are 
« S.S.S.S., iii. i. 18. 



646 INDIAN PHILOSOPHY 

interesting and valuable, but they are not the final truth. 
Before we attempt to define the exact significance of the 
Madhyamika theory of the phenomenality of the world, 
let us consider the arguments by which the Madhyamika 
establishes his view. 

The Madhyamika, as the name implies, adopts a position 
midway between extreme affirmation and extreme negation. 
If the world were real, no changes can occur in it at all. 
Improvement and enlightenment are possible only if the 
world is plastic and in a state of constant becoming. As 
Candrakirti, commenting on Nagarjuna, observes : “If 
everything has its own self-essence, which makes it impossible 
to pass from one state to another, how could a person desire 
to ascend, if he ever so desire, higher and higher on the scale 
of existence ? ” We cannot do anything in a world perfect 
and real. So it must be unreal. Nagarjuna asks: “If you 
negate the doctrine of Sunya, you negate causation. If 
there were such a thing as self-essence, the multitudinousness 
of things must be regarded as uncreated and imperishable, 
which is tantamount to eternal nothingness. If there were 
no emptiness, there would be no attainment of what has not 
yet been attained, nor would there be the annihilation of 
pain nor the extinction of all the passions.” 1 The nature 
of the world as an evolving process compels us to deny 
absolute reality to it. It seems clear from this that while 
Nagarjuna denies absolute being to the world, he does not 
reduce it to mere nothing. 

The Madhyamika theory of the phenomenal nature of the 
world follows from the doctrine of pratityasamutpada, or de- 
pendent origination. A thing is a mass of dharmas following 
one another in unbroken succession. The individual human 
being is a collection of dharmas, since every thought, sensation, 
or volition is a dharma. A carriage is the name of a collection 
of material dharmas ; a man is a collection of material and 
mental dharmas which constitute his pseudo-individuality. 
Apart from dharmas, carriage and man have only an ideal 
existence, an existence of designation (prajnapti) Dharmas 
alone exist, but they are doomed to destruction. Dharmas 
are moments in a continuous series. Every thought may 

* Chap. xxiv. 



THE SCHOOLS OF BUDDHISM 


647 


have as its determining cause or pratyaya a great 
number of dharmas, more or less external to itself, object 
of vision, visual organ, etc., but its cause or hetu properly so- 
called is the thought immediately preceding it, even as every 
moment of the duration of the flame depends on the oil, 
the wick, etc., though it is truly a continuation of the preced- 
ing moment of the flame. Nothing is by itself. Everything 
depends on something else. The Madhyamikas do tot 
dismiss all dharmas as well as their collections as unreal, 
though they look upon them as phenomenal and momentary . 1 
Yet it must be admitted that in the excitement of the argu- 
ment they sometimes suggest that they are utterly non- 
existent. 

If incapacity to explain is sufficient reason to deny the 
reality of a thing, then neither external objects nor inner 
souls are real. The Yogacaras argue that external objects are 
unreal, since we cannot say whether they arise from existence 
or not, whether they are simple atoms or complex bodies. 
Nagarjuna accepts the principle underlying this theory, 
that the unintelligible is the unreal, but he adds that on this 
showing even consciousness or vijnana is unreal, seeing that 
we cannot say anything consistent about it. It is in this 
connexion that Nagarjuna develops his theory of relations. 
The Yogacaras urge that all things have their being 
through relations of consciousness. We do not know of any 
other medium than a thinking consciousness through which 
alone things can subsist. Nagarjuna admits that relations 
constitute the world. The world is a mere complex of these 
relations. The hosts of heaven, the furniture of earth, all 
the bodies which compose this mighty frame of the world have 
no substantial existence. They are hypost-atised relations. 
But the relations themselves are unintelligible. Nagarjuna 
shows that the whole world of experience is an appearance, 
a mere network of unintelligible relations. Matter and soul, 
space and time, cause and substance, motion and rest, are all 
alike the baseless fabric of the vision which leave not a rack 


1 " When we come rationally to examine things, we cannot ascertain 
the nature of anything ; hence all things must be declared to be inexplicable 
and devoid of any assignable nature or character/* (L^nkavatara Sutra, ii, 

I 73-) 



648 


INDIAN PHILOSOPHY 


behind. Reality must at least be consistent. But the cate- 
gories through which we construct our reality or experience 
are unintelligible and self-contradictory. Intelligibility is the 
minimum expected of reality, but the relations of experience 
do not possess even that. Things which are not consistent 
may be actual, but they are not real. We are reminded of 
the attempt of Bradley, since the general principle is the 
same in the two cases. Of course, we have not here the 
luminous systematic application which constitutes the great- 
ness of Bradley’s metaphysics. Nagarj una’s attempt is 
neither so full nor so methodical as Bradley’s. He lacks 
the latter’s passion for system and symmetry, but he is 
aware of the general principle, and his work has a unity in 
spite of much that is deficient as well as redundant. 

The category of gati or motion cannot be explained. 
We cannot understand its nature. A thing cannot be in 
two places at one time. “We are not passing a path which 
has already been passed. Nor are we passing that which 
is yet to be passed. The existence of a path which has 
neither been passed nor is yet to be passed is beyond 
comprehension.” 1 The path may be divided into two 
sections, that which is already passed and that which has 
yet to be passed. There is no third possible. The first 
is over, the second is not yet, so passing is an impossibility. 
The consequences of this denial of motion are developed 
in the succeeding verses. 2 Since there is no passing, there 
can be no passer. 3 There cannot be an agent without 
passing, and yet how can an agent pass ? “ Inasmuch as 

you are not beginning to pass a path which has already 
been passed, nor are you beginning to pass what has not 
yet been passed, nor what is being passed, what then are 
you beginning to pass ? ” 4 We cannot assert the identity 
of the passer and the passing, since there cannot be a passer 
without the act of passing. If we say that the passer is 
different from the passing, we maintain that there can be an 
act of passing without the passer as well as a passer without 
the act of passing. They are neither identical with nor 
different from each other, and the only conclusion is that the 


1 Madhyamika Sutras, ii. I. 

» ii. 6. 7. S. 


■ ii- 2-5. 
4 ii. 12. 



THE SCHOOLS OF BUDDHISM 


649 


passer, the path and the act of passing are unreal. 1 Nor can 
we say that the act of staying or rest (sthiti) is real. Motion, 
change and rest are all unintelligible. It may appear that 
in all this Nagarjuna is creating artificial difficulties, since 
change and motion are facts. There is no doubt that they 
are actual, but the question is, how can we intelligibly 
conceive them ? So long as we are philosophising, we cannot 
stop short of complete explanation. Motion and rest 
cannot be completely explained, and so they are not final 
truths, but only relative terms, useful conventions. 

In chapter vii Nagarjuna takes up the question of com 
posite substances or saihskrtas which come into existence, 
continue and cease to exist. 2 If the three, origination, 
continuance and extinction, separately do not characterise 
a sarhskrta, how can they be jointly and simultaneously 
in one and the same object? If the object be without 
extinction and continuance at the time of its origination, 
then it is not called a sarhskrta. It is the same with the 
two other qualities. Yet all the three cannot be at the 
same moment. Light and darkness cannot exist simul- 
taneously, so sariiskrtas are not real. In chapter xxi 
he takes up the question of the origination and extinction, 
(sambhava vibhava) and proves their unreality. From the 
critical point of view, neither production nor destruction is 
possible. In chapter xix the conception of time, as including 
past, present and future, is declared to be an unintelligible 
category. The past is a doubtful report, and the future 
an indeterminate forecast. What is experienced in the 
present seems to be all that is. But we can have no present 
apart from the past and the future. Time, then, seems 
to be a form of thought, fabricated out of emptiness. 3 

A thing is known to us through its qualities. When we 
apprehend all the qualities, we are said to know the thing, 
and when we do not know them, we do not know the sub- 
stance. In chapter v Nagarjuna deals with this question, 
with special reference to the elements of earth, water, fire, 
air, akasa or ether, and consciousness or vijnana, and argues 

1 ii. 14. 18. 

« Utplda sthiti-bhanga-samahara-svabhSvam- 

5 Te ak.lsasthitena cetasa kalarh kurvanti. 



650 INDIAN PHILOSOPHY 

that there is no substance prior to attributes, for that would 
mean an attributeless substance . 1 Where then can the 
attributes exist ? They seem to be neither in substance 
without attributes, nor in themselves, and they can be nowhere 
else. Substance, again, cannot exist beyond the attributes, 
and there is nothing which is not a substance or an attribute. 
An attribute flings us back to a substance, and the substance 
leads us to attribute, and we do not know whether the two 
are one or different. Chapter xv treats of svabhava, or 
inherent property, and shows that neither existence nor 
non-existence can be proved to be the essential property 
of substance. Qualities, like colour, hardness, softness, 
smell, taste, etc., are subjective. They exist because there 
are senses. There would be no colour without the eye, no 
sound without the ear. The qualities then depend on con- 
ditions other than and different from themselves. They 
are not independently real, since they depend on our sense- 
organs. They cannot exist in themselves. Since qualities 
exist in relation to sense-organs, they are all dependent on 
the senses, and so Nagarjuna does not distinguish qualities 
into primary and secondary. Since all qualities are appear- 
ances only, the things in which they reside cannot be real. 
If the thing is related to the qualities, then the “ appearance ” 
character of the qualities should affect the thing as well. 
We are never aware of things which possess these qualities. 
Our knowledge is confined to qualities. The thing so-called 
is beyond experience, and therefore belief in it is a dogmatic 
assumption. We cannot say that these qualities and not 
some others belong to the thing. If substance is merely 
the glue which binds or keeps the qualities together without 
allowing them to clash with each other, then it becomes only a 
relation. Substance is then an abstract relation of qualities, 
and cannot exist apart from consciousness, which is the 
vehicle through which it is created. Substance and quality 
are correlative, and neither can be applied to reality as a 
whole. What absolutely exists is neither substance ncr 
quality, which are mutually dependent. Provisionally in 
our experience we may accept substance to be that in which 
qualities inhere, since we cannot imagine qualities, such as 

■ Chap. i. 



THE SCHOOLS OF BUDDHISM 


651 


weight, form, etc., apart from an underlying substratum. 
As a matter of fact, Nagarjuna believes that things seem to 
be real in virtue of the relationships of causality, dependence, 
contiguity and conditionality. 

The contradictions of the causal relations are brought 
out in chapter iv of the Madhyamika Sutras. “ An object 
as separate from its cause is not perceptible, and the cause 
of the object as separate from the object itself cannot be 
perceived. If the cause of the object is separate from the 
object itself, then you assert that the object is causeless. 
But to assert the existence of the cause of an object is not 
reasonable, for an object without cause does not exist.” 
Nagarjuna argues that an effect separate from cause or 
cause separate from effect is non -existing. A thing is born 
neither from itself nor from another, nor from both, nor 
without cause. Production seems to be logically impossible. 1 
Nothing real can be spoken of as coming to existence, nor 
can it be said that the pot this moment non-existent next 
moment becomes existent. That will be to assert a contra- 
diction. When we know that things have no absolute exist- 
ence, we see that they cannot produce others with such 
existence. If we speak of causes, we do so at the expense 
of logic, indulging in makeshifts of subject and object, 
substance and attribute, space and time. Absolutely 
speaking there is no cause or effect, no production or cessa- 
tion. 2 Sometimes cause is taken as the whole samagri or 
totality, which is also shown to be arbitrary and difficult to 
comprehend. 3 From this discussion it follows that the 
conception of change is unintelligible. A changes into B. 
Nagarjuna argues, if A could become B, it must always have 
been B, else it cannot become B. But it could not have been 
B, for then there is no point in saying that it has become B. 
The process of change is unintelligible. Causation cannot 
account for change, since it itself is an impossible conception. 

1 S.S.S.S., chap. iv. 7. 9, puts the argument thus : “ What is non-existent 
cannot be produced by any cause, such as a square circle ; if origination 
is admitted to be desirable in the case of what is existent, then it produces 
only that which has been already produced. One and the same thing cannot 
be both existent and non-existent. Nor can we say that one and the same 
thing is distinct from both existence and non-existence.” 

* Chap. xxi. 


3 Chap. xx. 



652 


INDIAN PHILOSOPHY 


A quality stands to substance in the relation of dependence. 
The two exist in virtue of a certain relationship. The cogni- 
tion and the cognisable stand in such a relation. Absolutely 
both are unreal, but relatively they seem to exist, and so 
long as one thing depends on another, neither is existent in 
itself. 

A phenomenon occupying a certain time or place stands 
to another in another time or place in the relation of con- 
tiguity, but that spatial relations are relative and that there 
is no absolute priority or posteriority are quite obvious. 

The part stands to the whole in the relation of condition- 
ality, as the threads to the cloth. There is no cloth apart 
from the threads, and there are no threads apart from the 
cloth. Neither has absolute existence. No whole without 
parts, no parts without a wTiole. The two seem to exist 
in virtue of the relationship of conditionality. But it is only 
seeming or sarhvrti. No objects of the universe absolutely 
exist. They appear to exist through relations. 

The question of self is taken up in chapter vi. The 
general principle that there is no substance apart from 
qualities leads to the conclusion that there is no self apart from 
states of consciousness. There is no soul prior to acting, 
feeling and thinking. In chapter ix Nagarjuna says : 
“ Some say that the entity (soul), whose act it is to see, hear 
and feel, existed prior to the acts. But how can we know 
that it existed prior to the acts ? ... If soul could exist 
prior to and therefore without the act of seeing, cannot 
seeing take place independent of soul ? The soul and the 
acts of seeing presuppose each other. Again, if it did not 
exist prior to all hearing, seeing, etc., how can it exist prior 
to each? If it is the same that sees, hears and feels, it must 
have existed prior to each. The soul does not exist in the 
elements from which the acts of seeing, hearing and feeling 
proceed.” The soul cannot be known until the acts of seeing, 
etc., take place So it did not exist prior to these acts. 
Nor does it become existent posterior to them. For if 
the acts of seeing, etc., could take place independently of 
the soul, what is the use of bringing in the latter ? The 
soul and the acts of seeing are simultaneous to each other. 
Unless they are independent of each other, they cannot 



THE SCHOOLS OF BUDDHISM 


653 


exist simultaneously 1 Nagarjuna applies to the self the 
arguments which the Yogacaras used to undermine 
external reality. If the properties which we read into the 
outer universe do not involve a permanent reality called 
matter,- why should the existence of ideas involve a self 
which is not an idea ? The uninterrupted series of momentary 
mental states is all we mean by self. We know nothing a.bout 
the nature of consciousness as such. It is a stream, an 
evolving field of presentations unrolling before us. Belief 
in a permanent self is as daring and dogmatic according to 
Nagarjuna as the parallel belief in a material world. That 
objects of consciousness are arranged in psychological 
sequences so as to constitute separate minds is a mere 
speculation. Things are just what they seem to be. We 
cannot even talk of a stream of ideas. If we admit the 
reality of a soul, apart from conscious states, it is only for 
practical purposes. The mutual dependence of self and 
its states, the agent and his acts, is also brought out in 
chapter via. “ The doer is so called in relation to the 
deed, and the deed is so called in relation to the doer. Abso- 
lutely speaking, there is neither doer nor doing.”* 

Knowledge is impossible of explanation. Sensations 
generate ideas, even as ideas generate sensations. The 
plants produce the seed and the seed again the plant. Per- 
ception is not self-existent. “ You are not seeing that which 
has already been seen. Nor are you seeing that which has 
not yet been seen ; the object of seeing which has neither 
already been seen nor has yet to be seen is non-existent.” 3 
“ The sense of seeing does not see it, nor does that which is 
not a sense of seeing do it. What third, then, is it that 
sees ? ”4 The seer, the seeable, and the act of seeing, answer- 
ing to the passer, the passable and the act of passing are 
all unthinkable. Perception and perceived objects exist 


* The Nyttya system refers to this view of Nagarjuna, and says 
in reply : “ If thus you deny perception, etc., then nobody can establish 
the existence of the objects of sense. If there are no objects of sense, no 
objections can be raised with regard to them. So your objections are alto- 
gether groundless. If you deny all evidences, then your objections lose 
value ; if you admit the validity of your objections, then you agree to the 
variety of perceptions, etc." 

* xvi. x. i iii. 3 . « iii. 4. 



654 


INDIAN PHILOSOPHY 


in relation to each other. If there is no vision, there is no 
colour ; and if there were no colours, there would be no visual 
perceptions. " As the son is dependent upon father and 
mother, even so is the visual sensation dependent on eyes 
and colours.” And we can never be sure that what we 
perceive is not altogether our own. The same thing appears 
differently to different persons and to the same person 
at different times. In chapter xiv samsarga, or contact, 
is analysed and rejected. The changes and states come and 
go, and even succession cannot be maintained unless that 
which feels is a unity which persists through succession. 
But this unitary self is itself a difficult conception. 

Again, what about general properties (jati) ? Are 
they to be found independent of the individuals characterised 
by them (jatimat), or are they always found in the individuals 
only ? All our knowledge depends upon difference. What 
is a cow ? Not a horse, not a sheep. It means a cow is 
not a not-cow. Instead of saying a cow is existent, we say 
it is non-existent as a horse or a tree. All our knowledge 
is relative and sustained by differentiation. The horse is 
non-existent, the world is non-existent. We do not know 
what these are. The dilemma is put thus : We cannot 
know the nature of a thing apart from its distinction from 
others. We cannot know its distinction from others apart 
from a knowledge of its own nature . 1 One thing takes us 
to another, and there is no end to this process. We cannot 
get the final explanations of things . 2 All things are relative. 
Nothing is self-existent, since everything is based on an 
endless series of causes and effects. All properties of things 
are relational, and not absolute. We work with schemes of 
relations which also do not coalesce. Things we see now 
are not seen in deep sleep. What is found in dreams is 
not found when we are awake. If anything were really 
existent, it should be found in all the three states. Thought 
cannot know itself and cannot know another. Truth must 


* Yasman na hi svabhfivarum pratyayadisu vidyate, 

Avidyamane svabhave, parabhavo navidyate. 

• Rupadivyatirekena yatha kumbho na vidyate, 

Vayvadivyatirekeija tatha rupam na vidyate. (Chap. I.) 



THE SCHOOLS OF BUDDHISM 655 

be equated with silence. Knowledge is an impossibility. 1 
Such is the conclusion of Nagarjuna's fierce logic. 

There is no God apart from the universe and no universe 
apart from God, and both are equally appearances. If 
Nagarjuna thus ridicules the idea of God, let us remember 
that it is the deist’s God that he repudiates. He is sincere 
in his devotion to the true God, the Dharmakaya of the 
Mahayana Buddhism. 

With a daring logic he shows how the world, composed 
of birth, life and death, is unreal. 2 Sufferings samskaras 4 or 
mental tendencies, bondage, liberations and all actions 6 are 
unreal. They are due to relations, the nature of which we can 
never comprehend. Nagarjuna has the courage to face the 
conclusions of his logic, however unpalatable they may be to the 
religious interests of mankind. He rounds off his system by 
saying that in reality there is no Buddha or tathagata,7 and 
from the absolute standpoint there is not even any distinction 
between truth and error at all. When there is nothing real, 
there is no possibility of misunderstanding anything. 8 The 
four noble truths of suffering 9 and the conceptions of nirvana 10 
are all unreal. In the very first stanza of his Madhyamika 
Sastra he says: " There is no death, no birth, no distinction, 
no persistence, no oneness, no manyness, no coming in, 
no going forth.” There is nothing real. The negative 
truth of this is already given. No positive demonstration 
is necessary. We require a cause for that which is, and not 
for that which is not. The world has only phenomenal 
existence, and things are neither transient nor eternal, neither 
produced nor destroyed, neither the same nor different, 
neither coming forth nor passing away, except in appearance. 
The world is nothing more than an ideal system of qualities 
and relations. We believe in relations which cannot be 
intelligibly explained. It is the higher superstition of science, 
that the categories useful in the world of experience are ulti- 
mately real, that Nagarjuna explodes. 

The world of experience is an illusion bred by relations. 
The categories of cause and effect, part and whole, which 

* Chap, xxvii. 1 Chap. xi. J Chap. xii. 4 Chap. xiii. 

5 Chap. xvi. 6 Chap, xviii. 7 Chap. xxii. * Chap, xxiii. 

» Chap. xxiv. Chap. xxv. 



656 


INDIAN PHILOSOPHY 


are not self-existent, but mutually dependent, make up the 
world. They give us the provisional seeming reality which 
is the object of samvrti, or conventional knowledge. They 
are suited to the determinations of the reciprocal relations 
'T phenomena. When they attempt to express the true 
essence of existence, they contradict themselves. They are 
working ideas without ultimate philosophical significance. 
We may mention here that while Bradley contends that 
thought establishes relations between terms that are not 
themselves reducible to relations, Nagarjuna accepts a posi- 
tion similar to that of Green, that the reality of experience is 
a relational one, except for the absolute, which stands behind. 
To Bradley, in the world of common sense and science, there 
is always something that cannot be reduced to relations. 
To Nagarjuna there is nothing of that nature here. Yet 
Nagarjuna is not a mere destructive sceptic, but a con- 
structive thinker. There is an ultimate truth which science 
cannot reach. He pulls to pieces all experience, so that he 
may reveal the absolute behind it. The phenomenal world 
involves real oppositions, and the noumenal is pure affirma- 
tion. We cannot help thinking of something behind the 
world we see, hear and feel. The colour, the form and the 
sound which we perceive are not homeless attributes of 
nothing. In chapter iv Nagarjuna tells us that sunyata is 
a conclusion forced on him, and not assumed by him at the 
start. To take it for granted would be to commit the fallacy 
of sadhyasama, petitio principii. Phenomenalism is forced 
on him. The question of logic as theory of knowledge is 
how experience is possible. Nagarjuna exhibits the con- 
ditions which render experience possible, shows their un- 
intelligibility, and infers the non-ultimate character of 
experience. The whole show of Nagarjuna’s logic is a 
screen for his heart, which believed in an absolute reality, 
The outer scepticism was in the interests of the inner truth. 
Nature is an appearance, yet there is the eternal foundation, 
the infinite, from which everything springs and into which 
everything retires. Only when talking about it we must 
drop all categories relative to our empirical life. We cannot 
say what it is, whether it is free or conscious. The questions 
themselves imply the transference to the infinite reality of 



THE SCHOOLS OF BUDDHISM 


65 ? 


the conditions of our finite existence. To refuse to define 
the infinite spirit is not to deny it. The reality of the absolute 
involves the phenomenality of the world. “ The skandlias 
are empty, all things have the character of emptiness, they 
have no beginning, no end, they are faultless and not faultless, 
they are not imperfect and not perfect, therefore, 0 Sari- 
putta, here in this emptiness there is no form, no perception, 
no name, no concept, no knowledge.” 1 

Admitting that the world of knowledge is relational, 
the Yogacaras posited the reality of vijnana which relates. 
Nagarjuna takes up the concept of vijnana as self, and shows 
its inadequacy. If the vijnana is a finite self, then it is not 
the ultimate principle. If it is the infinite spirit, it is wrong 
to attribute to it the empirical category of selfhood. The 
absolute is just the absolute, and we cannot say anything 
of it. All thinking is relative, and the absolute when thought 
becomes a kind of relative ; we cannot think of it as self- 
conscious personality without setting up some dummy to 
relate it to. 


VII 

Degrees of Truth and Reality 

Nagarjuna’s theory of phenomenalism seems to require 
us to abandon the whole scheme of values as an illusion. 
When everything becomes unreal, good and evil are also 
unreal, and we need not strive to attain the state of nirvana 
and free ourselves from miseries which do not exist. We 
cannot live taking life to be an illusion. It seems to be 
wellnigh impossible to base moral life on a detected illusion. 
Though the miseries are unreal, when judged by the absolute 
standard, they are real so far as our present existence is 
concerned. To one who has realised the paramartha there 
is no problem at all. For he has reached nirvana, but those 
who are entangled in the world have to w'ork. Morality 
is not jeopardised, since the course of illusion is irresistible 
to all on earth. The illusion is so vital to human life that 
the distinction of good and evil remains unaffected whatever 

1 Larger PrajnapararnitahnTaya Sutra, p. 148. S.B.E., xlix. 



658 


INDIAN PHILOSOPHY 


might happen to it in the higher condition. Nagarjuna 
recognises two kinds of truth, absolute and empirical. 
“ The teaching of Buddha relates to two kinds of truth, 
the relative, conditional truth, and the transcendent absolute 
truth.” 1 By means of this distinction the otherwise insoluble 
contradiction between absolute nihilism and ethical life is 
avoided. While the higher leads to nirvana, only through 
the lower can the higher be reached. Samvrti is the pro- 
duct of man’s reason. It is the cause of the universe and its 
phenomena. It literally means a covering or screen which 
keeps off the truth. There is no need to prove its existence 
since it is its own evidence. A dreaming man cannot deny 
his dreaming by any argument, since every argument used 
by him is as false as the thing which it goes to prove or 
disprove. When we wake up we can prove the falsity of 
the object seen in a dream. Even so the falsity of samvrti 
or practical truth can be proved by the attainment of para- 
martha or absolute truth. No amount of samvrti argumenta- 
tion can discredit samvrti itself. In it everything happens 
as if things were composed of real and substantial dharmas. 
The distinctions of subject and object, truth and error, bond- 
age and liberation are valid at this level. Ultimately samvrti 
is no truth at all, since it is all a dream or a delusion. All 
things in the world, its beautiful illusions like Buddha and 
sacred hopes of nirvana, are shattered to pieces. The com- 
monplace objection, that if all is illusory, even the idea 
of illusion must be illusory, does not shock Nagarjuna. The 
dialectical difficulties lead him to the acceptance of an 
absolute answering to paramartha or eternal truth. To the 
objection, that if everything is void, if nothing arises or passes 
away, there cannot be any distinction between good and 
evil, truth and error, Nagarjuna replies that the supreme 
truth which will quench all craving and bring inward peace 
lies concealed by samvrti or the conventions of our common 
life. Strictly speaking, there is no existence, no cessation of 
being, no birth or deliverance. The real is sunya in the sense 
that there is nothing concrete or individual. It does not 
mean that it is absolute nothingness or a blank featureless 


* Chap. xxiv. 



THE SCHOOLS OF BUDDHISM 


659 


being . 1 It is empty, as distinct from samvrti, which is said to 
be real. Nagarjuna quotes Buddha to the effect : “ There is 
no woman, no man, no life, no sentient being, no self. All 
these dharmas are unreal, non-existent, like dreams, fictions, 
like the reflection of the moon in the water.” 

Reason is condemned as defective only to make room for 
faith. It is a faith sustained by knowledge, and not bred 
by ignorance. It is not a mere empty play of fancy, but is 
based on reason. If the absolute and the relative truths 
were unrelated, we would be involved in absolute scepticism. 
Knowledge cannot be vindicated, even as the knowledge 
of phenomenon or appearance if it were absolutely severed 
from the knowledge of noumenal reality. Nagarjuna points 
out that without resorting to practical truth the trans- 
cendental truth cannot be attained . 2 The truth of intellect 
is not to be brushed aside, even though it is not final. It 
is not the supreme power which some philosophers take it 
to be. The highest truth which is not revealed by intellect 
is to the finite mind only a postulate. We can believe it 
though we cannot see it. No man can say that he has 
known it as he has known objects of experience. Yet he. 
feels that some such hypothesis is necessary to round our 
experience. The facts in our hands demand completion 
in the manner indicated. Yet the plan is not spread out 
before us. The truth is hovering over our hearts and will 
descend into them if we are ready. We must transcend our 
limitations. Absence of perfect insight is quite consistent 
with belief in its necessity. Though the idea cannot be 
brought within the range of logical argument, yet the faith 
is a grounded one. Only such is true faith, the evidence 
of things not seen. 

Adopting a very abstract standpoint, Kumarila criticises 
Nagarjuna to the effect that : “ It must be admitted that 
that which does not exist never exists, and that which exists 
is absolutely real, and therefore there can be no assump- 

1 Cf. But whereso’er the highways tend. 

Be sure there’s nothing at the end. 

R. L. Stevenson. 

* Vyav. haram ana£ritya paramartho na deSyate, chap. xxiv. 



660 INDIAN PHILOSOPHY 

tion of two kinds of truth.” 1 ^amkara believes that the 
Madhyamika theory supports the mere nothingness of 
the world. Udayana, under the same impression, asks : “ Is 
the conception of £unya or void, a fact or not ? If it is not 
a fact perceived by and through one, how can you say that 
the world is sunya ? If it is a fact, is it self-evident or per- 
ceived by and through some one else ? Then, the existence 
of some one else and what he perceived must both be 
admitted.’* 

i\ agarj una recognises different kinds of existence. The 
objects of hallucination do not exist in the same sense in 
which the objects of perception exist, though both of them as 
facts of mind belong to the same order. All things and 
persons are collections of dharmas, and the difference between 
the two is determined by the nature of the dharmas which 
group themselves. In the case of things similar dharmas 
enter. In the case of persons it is not so. While our vital 
organs, etc., renew themselves without any essential modifica- 
tion, the mental dharmas are subject to great changes. 
The objects of hallucination have no extra-mental existence, 
while those of experience live in the context of experience, 
and to that extent are independent of the subject. Nagarjuna 
recognises that the world exists in the sense of having a posi- 
tion in time and space, though it does not involve permanence 
or persistence. The object of experience has a certain fixity 
due to its spatial position and temporal context. We can 
become aware of it under certain conditions, and repeat 
that experience also. It is trans-subjective, being an object 
common to all normal experience under appropriate condi- 
tions. The purely mental state is neithe* extended nor 
determined by spatial relations, and is of a transient nature, 
and directly apprehended by one subject only. Material 
existence has thus a greater certainty than the purely mental. 
Images are transient, changing with the flow of consciousness, 
while objects of sense-perception are relatively certain and 
capable of reinstatement in consciousness in accordance with 
definite conditions. Existence in the world means position in 
time, space and the causal system, though not absolute self- 
existence. This does not mean that they are non-existent 
1 Na satyadvayakalpana. §lokavarttika, 115, 3, 10 



THE SCHOOLS OF BUDDHISM 


661 


The Lalitavistara says : “ There is no object which is existent, 
neither is there any which is non-existent.” The world is 
not absolutely real, nor is it absolute nothingness, for the 
latter is an impossible conception. By £unya, therefore, the 
Madhyamika does not mean absolute non-being, but only 
relative being. It is Samkara’s empirical existence. To 
say that the things are not substantial in the sense of self- 
existent is one thing. To say that they are not only non- 
substantial, but that they do not exist at all, is quite another. 
We seem to get tendencies of both these views in the 
Madhyamika writings, while the former seems to be their true 
position. The pratityasamutpada doctrine, that it is the 
nature of dharmas to be produced by concurrent causes, and 
and what is so produced is not produced in itself, and therefore 
does not exist in itself, shows only that the actually existent 
things are not ultimately real. £unya in this sense means 
production by causes or dependence. The Buddhist realists, 
the Sautrantikas and the Vaibhasikas, on the other hand, 
lay no stress on the view that what is produced by causes 
does not exist in itself, and is without any substantiality, 
and is therefore Stinya or void. “ All is declared ^unya, empty, 
because there is nothing that is not the product of universal 
causation.” 1 The £unyavada of the Madhyamikas is 
negatively the non-existence of substances and positively 
the ever-changing flux of samsara. It is sometimes said 
that the Madhyamikas assert that the dharmas do not 
exist at all either in reality or in appearance. They are to 
be compared only with such impossible things like the 
daughter of a barren woman. We may describe the beauty 
of such a woman, and yet the object described along with 
the description is non-existent. This view does not represent 
the intentions of Nagarjuna, however much some of his state- 
ments may lend themselves to such an interpretation. One 
such statement is the following : " Do we not experience 
the dharmas ? ” Nagarjuna says. “ Yes, even as the monk 
with diseased eyes sees hair in an alms bowl. As a matter 
of fact, he does not see it, for the knowledge of it does not 
exist any more than its object. This is proved by the fact 
that a man with healthy eyes has no thought about the 

* Chap. xxiy. 



662 


INDIAN PHILOSOPHY 


hair.” When the individual gains absolute truth, he knows 
things in their true nature, and will not then affirm their 
existence. They no more appear to him, and so absolute 
knowledge means no knowledge of things. The whole world 
is like a magical show. The saint free from avidya is not 
subject to it : what seemingly exists is an illusion. Since 
to the Madhyamikas all thoughts and things are void, they 
are sometimes called Sarvavainasikas. This view, that the 
world with its suns and stars is nothing more than a baseless 
appearance, is quite in consonance with the popular classifica- 
tion of the four Buddhist schools into the Vaibhasikas, or 
presentationists, who admit the perceptibility of external 
objects; the Sautrantikas, or representationists ; the Yoga- 
caras, or subjectivists ; and the Madhyamikas, or nihilists. 
But we do not think that this view is true to the teaching of 
Nagarjuna, who is not the common conjurer who wishes to 
prove that the chair we sit on is not a chair. Existence 
in the only possible sense of continuous production of 
phenomena he admits, though he denies to it absolute reality. 


VIII 

SuNYAVADA AND ITS IMPLICATIONS 

The term §unya is variously understood. To some it 
means nothingness, to others a permanent principle, trans- 
cendent and indefinable, immanent in all things. The former 
is true of the world of experience ; the latter of the meta- 
physical reality. Even the illusory structure cannot be sus- 
tained in the atmosphere of a void. All negation depends on 
a hidden affirmation. Absolute negation is impossible. Total 
scepticism is a figment, since such scepticism implies the 
validity of the sceptic’s judgment. Nagarjuna admits the 
existence of a higher reality, though with the Upanisads 
he considers it to be not an object of experience. “ The 
eye does not see and the mind does not think ; this is the 
highest truth, wherein men do not enter. The land wherein 
the full vision of all objects is obtained at once has by the 
Buddha been called the paramartha, or absolute truth, which 



THE SCHOOLS OF BUDDHISM 


663 


cannot be preached in words.” 1 " It cannot be called void 

or not void, or both or neither, but in order to indicate it, it 
is called the void.” 3 There is fundamental reality, with- 
out which things would not be what they are. §unyata 
is a positive principle. Kumarapva, commenting on 
Nagarjuna, observes : “ It is on account of sunyata that 
everything becomes possible, without it nothing in the world 
is possible.” It is the basis of all. “ 0 Subhuti, all d’narmas 
have for their refuge sunyata ; they do not alter that refuge. ”3 
" ^Qnyata is the synonym of that which has no cause, that 
which is beyond thought or conception, that which is not 
produced, that which is not born, that which is without 
measure." 4 As applied to the world of experience, sunyata 
means the ever-changing state of the phenomenal world. 
In the dread waste of endlessness man loses all hope, but the 
moment he recognises its unreality he transcends it and 
reaches after the abiding principle. He knows that the 
whole is a passing dream, where he might sit unconcerned 
at the issues, certain of victory. 

About the ultimate reality we cannot say anything. 
To attain truth we must cast aside the conditions which are 
incompatible with truth. The absolute is neither existent 
nor non-existent, nor both existent and non-existent, nor 
different from both non-existence and existence. 5 To the 
Madhyamikas reason and language apply only to the finite 
world. To transfer the finite categories to the infinite 
would be like attempting to measure the heat of the sun 
by the ordinary thermometer. From our point of view the 
absolute is nothing. 6 We call it sunyam, since no category 
used in relation to the conditions of the world is adequate 
to it. To call it being is wrong, because only concrete things 
are. To call it non-being is equally wrong.7 It is best to 

1 Chap. iii. 

1 Sunyam iti na vaktavyam asunyam iti vSi bhavet 

Ubhayaih uobhayam ceti prajfiaptyartham tu kathyate. 

i Prajnaparamita. 

4 Astasahasrika Prajnaparamita, chap, xviii. 

5 Astinasti ubhaya anubhaya iti catuskotivinirmuktaih Sunyatvam. 
Madhava. S.D.S. 

6 Sunyam tattvam. 

^ Tatra astita. va nastitS. va na vidyate nopalablivate. 



664 


INDIAN PHILOSOPHY 


avoid all descriptions of it. Thought is dualistic in its 
functions, and what is, is non-dual or advaita. Buddha is 
reported to have said : “ What description can be given 
and what knowledge devised of an object which cannot be 
represented by the letters of the alphabet ? Even this 
much of description that it does not admit of representation 
by the letters of the alphabet is made by means of attributing 
letters to the transcendent, absolute, signified by the term 
£unyata.” “ The real state of dharma is like nirvana, inde- 
scribable, incomprehensible, without birth or death, beyond 
the reach of thought and language.” 1 It is in this sense of 
transcending all relations that Duns Scotus says : “ God is 
not improperly called nothing.” ” For thought, what is 
not relative, is nothing.” 3 

While the absolute is free from all modes of limitations 
and cannot be thought by our finite consciousness, still, 
on account of avidya inherent in human mind, it manifests 
itself in the phenomenal world. Avidya is the principle of 
relativity. Of course, the world reflects the permanent 
substance, otherwise we cannot attain paramartha through 
samvrti, which Nagarjuna admits. The essence of things 
is sunya in both senses of the term. " The objects that we 
perceive now were sunya in the past and will be sunya in 
the future. All things in their nature have sunya for 
their essence.” It is avidya that makes us attribute 
existence to things which do not exist. The knowledge 
of the truth is called Mahavidya and its opposite is 
avidya. 

The sunya of Nagarjuna will remind the reader of 
Hamilton’s unconditioned or Spencer’s inscrutable pow'er. 
On account of its non-relational character, it is compared 
sometimes to the One of Plotinus, the substance of 


« Chap, xviii. 

> Bradley. According to the Mahopanisad, Brahman is “ 3finya or void, 
tuccha or trivial, abhava or non-existent, avyakta or unmanifest, adrsya or 
invisible, acintya or inconceivable, and nirguna or qualityless.” Yogasvaro- 
dava describes Brahman whose nature is reality, wisdom and joy as sunya. 
Sunyam tu sacctdanandam mhsabdabrahmaSabditam. Cf. also Kabir : ‘‘They 
call Him emptiness who is the Truth of truths, in Whom all truths are stored." 
(Tagore's translation.) 



THE SCHOOLS OF BUDDHISM 


665 


Spinoza, and the neutrum of Schelling. To the mind 
weary with the agitation of the world it has a great appeal . 1 
The highest is immobile in its absoluteness, and seems to 
be the negation of all becoming. The moment the element 
of negation is asserted, its absoluteness is compromised. 
On such a view, if the absolute is all real, then it cannot have 
any principle of negation. Such a boundless being may 
seem a dead, dull nothing. Negation seems to be as necessary 
as affirmation. Without it we have not the element of 
distinction, and consequently life or manifestation is impos- 
sible. If pure being were alive and real, we should be obliged 
to think in it a principle of distinction, of negativity. 
Nagarjuna would look upon such an argument as “ human, 
much too human.” Our incapacity to define the nature 
of the absolute or understand the mystery of the relation 
between the finite and the infinite need not persuade us 
to the belief that it is nothing. The proof of the absolute 
reality and its fullness of being is the nirvanic bliss attained 
by mystics. If the Yogacara be later than the Madhyamika 
theory, we can easily understand the logic of the develop- 
ment. An intellectual account of Nagarjuna’s absolute 
will lead us to the theory of alayavijnana. From our 
finite level, Nagarjuna’s absolute seems to be immobile 
in its absoluteness. To the Yogacara it is universal 
consciousness, which is ever growing. Things and persons 
are not outside it, but in it. They are in its perpetual 
process, included in the consciousness of the absolute. 
To the Maahyamikas the things seem external to pure 
being, bound in by their own finitencss, closed by their 
existence, and we do not know how they are related to the 
infinite being. Alayavijnana is not a state, but a process. 
It is spirituality, vijnana objectifying itself or expressing 
itself in the object world. The highest way in which thought 


1 Cf. Faber’s hymn : 

O Lord, my heart is sick, 

Sick of this everlasting change. 

And life runs tediously quick 
Through its unresting race and vaiied rangp, 
Change finds no likeness of itself in Thee, 
And makes no echo in Thy mute eternity. 



666 


INDIAN PHILOSOPHY 


can envisage the absolute is by looking upon it as conscious- 
ness, cit, vijnana. In it we have both affirmation and 
negation, identity and difference. The Yogacara theory is 
akin to that type of Hegelianism which puts self-conscious- 
ness at the centre of things. The Madhyamika theory is 
an advaitism of the type of Samkara or of Bradley, for the 
concept of self to it is not ultimate. The idea of self is after 
all a relation, and it is not logical to make the absolute 
subject to any relation whatsoever. 


IX 

Conclusion 

Though the world is phenomenal, we take it to be real, 
through the pressure of past habit. To arrive at nirvana 
we have to follow the ancient path, and put an end to all 
misery by giving up false notions of the reality of things. 
Pain and misery as well as happiness and joy are due to our 
avidya. Mind is the source of all trouble and unhappiness. 
Ethical relations have their value in the finite world. 

It has been shown that sarhsara is a mere show. If we 
understand its truth, then it is nirvana. The truth is 
the absolute. Tathagata is absence of particular being, 
and the world is also absence of definite being . 1 All that is 
said of sunya is true of nirvana. It is beyond the realm 
of relative expression. We cannot say whether it is sunya 
or asunya, or both or neither . 2 Conventionally we say Buddha 
exists. Strictly we cannot say even that. Nagarjuna says : 
“ That is called nirvana which is not wanting, is not acquired, 
is not intermittent, is not non-intermittent, is not subject to 
description and is not created.” When nirvana is obtained, 
ignorance terminates, and the bonds of existence are loosened. 
The unconditioned, uncreate, formless, alone remains. It 
is even said that nirvana is not something to be attained. 
Only ignorance has to be got rid of. 

Those who strive after final attainment or mukti must 
iractise hard the six transcendental virtues of charity, 


1 Chap. xxii. 1 6. See also xxv. 12. 
• Chap. xxii. n. 



THE SCHOOLS OF BUDDHISM 


667 


morality, patience, enterprise, meditation and suprema 
wisdom, and attain perfection in them. If we ask, How can 
a bodhisattva who knows the unreality of all try to lift 
others from their sin ?, the answer may be given in the 
words of Vajracchedika : " He who has entered on the 
path of the bodhisattvas should thus frame his thought : 
All beings must be delivered by me in the perfect world of 
nirvana, yet after I have delivered these beings, no being 
has been delivered. And why ? Because, O Subhuti, if a 
bodhisattva had any idea of beings, he could not be called a 
bodhisattva.” 1 "A gift should not be given by a bodhisattva 
as accepting objects as real.” 2 Strictly speaking, even the 
presumption of the reality of a bodhisattva is untrue. 

The Vaibhasikas started with a dualistic metaphysics, 
and looked upon knowledge as a direct awareness of 
objects. The Sautrantikas made ideas the media through 
which reality is apprehended, and thus raised a screen be 
tween mind and things. The Yogacaras quite consistently 
abolished the things behind the images, and reduced all 
experience to a series of ideas in their mind. The Madhya- 
mikas, in a more daring and logical manner, dissolved mind 
also into a mere idea, and left us with loose units of ideas 
and perceptions about which we can say nothing definite. 
English empiricism repeats this logical movement. The 
starting-point of the mechanist logic of Locke and his successors 
was to conceive of subject and object as interacting, finite 
entities, and the content of knowledge as the product of 
this interaction. Through such knowledge, which contains 
neither of the factors of which it is said to be the product, 
we cannot know either the subject or the object. We see 
the logical consequence of such a theory in the scepticism 
of Hume, where self and world are reduced to sequences of 
mental states. The English side of the movement is thus 
summed up by Reid : “ Ideas were first introduced into 

philosophy in the humble character of images or representa- 
tives of things, and in this character they seemed not only 
to be inoffensive, but to serve admirably well fur explaining 
the operations of the human understanding. But since 
men began to reason clearly and distinctly about them. 

1 S.B.E., xlix. p. 132. ’ Ibid., p. 1. 

VGL. I 


22 



6G8 


INDIAN PHILOSOPHY 


they have, by degrees, supplanted their constituents and 
undermined the existence of everything but themselves. . . . 
These ideas are as free and independent as the birds of the 
air. . . . Yet, after all, these self-existent and independent 
ideas look pitifully naked and destitute when left thus 
alone in the universe, set adrift without a rag to cover their 
nakedness.” 1 Knowledge is not possible, experience is 
unintelligible, and philosophy could go no further without 
i radical reconsideration of its fundamental position. 

From the metaphysical point of view, the two-substance 
theory of the Vaibhasikas becomes loaded on the side of 
mind when we come to the Sautrantikas. The Yogacaras 
dropped the outer world and put mind in the centre of things, 
and the Madhyamikas affirmed that neither individual 
selves nor material objects could be held to be ultimately 
real : the real is the absolute. While the Yogacaras 
confidently apply the concept of self-consciousness to the 
absolute, the Madhyamikas consider self as well as not-self to 
be equally unreal. Personality is not ultimate. 

We need not say that the Advaita Vedanta philosophy 
has been very much influenced by the Madhyamika doctrine. 
The Alatasanti of Gaudapada’s Karikas is full of Madhyamika 
tenets. The Advaitic distinction of vyavahara, or experience, 
and paramartha, or reality, correspond to the samvrti and 
the paramartha of the Madhyamikas. The Nirguna Brahman 
of Samkara and Nagarjuna’s sunya have much in common. 
The force of avidya introducing the phenomenal universe 
is admitted by both. The keen logic which breaks up the 
world into a play of abstractions, categories and relations 
appears in both. If we take an Advaita Vedantin like Sri Harsa, 
we find that he does little more than develop the Madhya- 
mika theory, expose the self-contradictions of the categories 
we work with, such as cause and effect,substance and attribute, 
and deny the reality of things on account of the impossibility 
of adequately explaining them. According to the Khandana 
of Sri Harsa, things are anirvacanlya, or indescribable ; 
according to the Madhyamika vrtti they are nihsvabhava, 
or devoid of essence. To be indefinable and to be character- 
less are, after all, the same. With the Buddhist’s attitude to 

* Works, p. 109 . 



THE SCHOOIS OF BUDDHISM 


C69 


th« unseen, Nagarjuna does not dwell much on the positive 
absolute, though he admits its reality. By his negative 
logic, which reduces experience to a phenomenon, he prepares 
the ground for the Advaita philosophy. It is a strange irony 
that the great exponents of the two doctrines look upon 
themselves as supporting antagonistic positions. 

REFERENCES 

Sarvadarsanasaihgraha, chap. ii. 

Sarvasiddhantasarasamgraha. 

Sariikara's Commentary on the Vedanta Sutras. 

Nagarjuna's Madhyamika Sutras. 

Yamakamj Sogen : Systems of Buddhistic Thought. 




APPENDIX 


FURTHER CONSIDERATION OF SOME 
PROBLEMS * 

The Method of Approach — The Comparative Standpoint — The Upani- 
sads — Early Buddhism — The Negative, the Agnostic and the Positive 
Views — Early Buddhism and the Upanisads — The Schools of Buddhism 
- — Nagarjuna’s Theory of Reality — Sunyavada and the Advaita 
Vedanta. 

My book on Indian Philosophy has been kindly received, 
and I take this opportunity to thank my critics for their 
appreciation and sympathy. I propose to deal here with a 
few controversial issues that the first volume has raised, such 
as the method of philosophical interpretation, the value of 
comparative studies, the teaching of the Upanisads, the 
alleged atheism of Buddha, and the metaphysics of Nagarjuna. 

I 

The historian of philosophy must approach his task, not 
as a mere philologist or even as a scholar but as a philosopher 
who uses his scholarship as an instrument to wrest from words 
the thoughts that underlie them. A mere linguist regards 
the views of ancient Indian thinkers as so many fossils lying 
scattered throughout the upheaved and faulty strata of the 
history of philosophy, and from his point of view any inter- 
pretation which makes them alive and significant is dismissed 
as far-fetched and untrue. A philosopher, on the other hand, 
realises the value of the ancient Indian theories which attempt 
to grapple with the perennial problems of life and treats them 
not as fossils but as species which are remarkably persistent. 
The reactions of the human mind to the problems of philosophy 
which are recorded in the Upanisads or the Dialogues of 
Buddha are to be met with in a reincarnated form in some of 
the most flourishing systems of the present day. Though the 
sayings of the ancient Indians may be scattered, ambiguous 

1 This essay appeared in Mind, vol. xxxv., N.S. No. 138. 



672 


INDIAN PHILOSOPHY 


and unco-ordinated, there is no reason to assume that then 
logic was as full of lacunae as are their literary remains. It 
is the tasJc of creative logic, as distinct from mere linguistic 
analysis, to piece together the scattered data, interpret for 
us the life they harbour and thus free the soul from the body. 
Max Muller wrote: “ What I feel is, that it is not enough simply 
to repeat the watchwords of any ancient philosophy, which are 
easily accessible in the Sutras, but that we must at least 
make an attempt to bring those ancient problems near to us, 
to make them our own, and try to follow the ancient thinkers 
along the few footsteps which they left behind.” 1 Collection 
of facts and the accumulation of evidence are an important 
part, but only a part, of the task of the historian who attempts 
to record the manifold adventures of the human spirit. 2 He 
must pay great attention to the logic of ideas, draw inferences, 
suggest explanations and formulate theories which would 
introduce some order into the shapeless mass of unrelated 
facts. If the history of philosophy is to be more than a bare 
catalogue of facts about dead authors and their writings, if it 
is to educate the mind and enthral the imagination, the his- 
torian should be a critic and an interpreter and not a mere 
mechanical “ ragpicker.” 


II 

The cultivated in both east and west desire now a mutual 
understanding, and nothing is so useful for it as comparative 
studies. There are dangers to which the method is open, 
since it is very difficult to be discriminating for the European 
scholar or the Indian interpreter. The works in the “ Re- 


1 Six Systems of Indian Philosophy, p. 293. 

1 Cp. Hegel: " For, in thought and particularly in speculative thought, 
comprehension means something quite different from understanding the 
grammatical sense of the words alone, and also from understanding them 
in the region of ordinary conception only. Hence we may possess a know- 
ledge of the assertions, propositions, or of the opinions of philosophers; we 
may have occupied ourselves largely with the grounds of and deductions 
from these opinions and the mam point in all that we have done may be 
wanting — the comprehension of the propositions.” Hegel compares such 
non-philosophical historians of philosophy, “to animals which have listened 
to all the tones in some music, but to whose senses the unison, the harmony 
of their tones has not penetrated .” — History of Philosophy, E.T., vol. i., p. xxv. 



SOME PROBLEMS 


673 


ligious Quest of India ” series written by European missionaries 
living in India, though they mark an advance on the publica- 
tions of the missionaries of a previous generation, are not un- 
prejudiced accounts of Indian thought, since they are written 
with the explicit aim of presenting Christianity as the final goal 
of Indian thought and quest. Many of the Western students 
of Indian culture are convinced that Indians have been stunted 
in soul from the beginning and that it is quite beyond them 
to find out for themselves anything worth while in philosophy 
or religion, not to speak of science, art and literature. They 
are certain that the Western nations had held for all time 
the monopoly of effective culture and philosophising. They 
attempt to establish the higher antiquity and superiority 
of the European civilisation and trace everything great and 
good in Indian thought to the Christian era. They declare 
that many of the achievements for which the ignorant give 
credit to the Indian are really borrowings from Greece. They 
are inclined to date the hymns of the Rg-Veda and the civilisa- 
tion reflected in them much later than Babylonian and Egyptian 
cultures. 

While the Western scholar is inclined to dismiss as unfair 
all attempts to compare the “ crude and primitive ” specula- 
tions of ancient India with the mature systems of the West, 
there are not wanting critics in India who feel a sort of old 
pride injured when they find Indian thought compared with 
the Western. They think that, in matters of religion and 
philosophy, at any rate, India is far superior to the West, 
and that Western thought is jejune and primitive when com- 
pared with the Indian. 

With these judgments one sympathises or not according to 
one’s taste. But mutual understanding is not possible without 
mutual respect and sympathy bom of it. If we are true to 
history, we shall see that each nation has had its own share 
of the inner light and spiritual discovery. No cultural or 
religious imperialist, who has the settled conviction that he 
alone has all the light and others are groping in darkness, can 
be a safe guide in comparative studies. The reliable interpreter 
should adopt the empirical method of investigation with a 
reasonable exercise of intelligence and imagination. While 
he should discuss Indian views in terms of modern thought 



674 


INDIAN PHILOSOPHY 


and relate them to the problems of the day, he must be cautious 
and careful in the use of his terms, which may be really different 
though apparently equivalent. He must avoid substituting 
modem arguments for ancient lines of thought. In an enter- 
prise of this kind, one is always liable to be accused of reading 
the one into the other, but there is this difficulty in all historical 
work. The only safeguard against this risk is through the 
adoption of the comparative method. We should then be able 
to bring out what is characteristic of each tradition and appre- 
ciate its value. 

Ill 

Many of my critics were puzzled by my discussion of the 
Upanisads, since I did not fly a banner and fix a label to my 
view. My criticism of the theory of “ illusion,” generally 
associated with fsarhkara’s metaphysics and supported by 
Deussen, led some of my critics to imagine that I was opposed 
to fsamkara’s view. My indifference to personal theism made 
it equally clear to some others that I was not friendly to 
Ramanuja’s interpretation. But if one is not a follower of 
Samkara or of Ramanuja or any other classical interpreter, 
it is assumed that one can only be a reveller in strange un- 
philosophical confusion. I submit that my interpretation of 
the Upanisads is not an unreasonable one, though it may seem 
to differ from this or that tradition in this or that point. 

Scholastic explanations overwhelm the teaching of any 
original genius. We tend to see Socrates with the eyes of 
Plato, or Plato with the eyes of Aristotle or Plotinus. The 
Upanisads are generally interpreted in the light of one or the 
other of the great commentators. My endeavour was to 
show how the Upanisads lent themselves to divergent develop- 
ments and whether it was not possible to give a coherent 
account of their teaching which would do justice to the main 
principles of the two chief interpreters, isarhkara and Ramanuja. 
If we can find a single point of view from which the different 
interpretations can be reconciled and understood— it may be 
that no such point of view exists — but if one can be found, it 
is likely that we can understand the teaching of the Upanisads 
better. In philosophical interpretation, the most coherent 
view is the most true. 



SOME PROBLEMS 


675 


The Upanisads speak with a double voice in describing 
the nature of ultimate reality. They sometimes make it the 
absolute which cannot be characterised by the phenomenal 
categories; at other times they identify it with the supreme 
person whom we are to adore and worship. As the result of 
this, we have two views about the nature of the world. In 
some passages, the world is regarded as an accident of Brah- 
man (the absolute) and in others as organic to God. A careful 
reader perceives these two tendencies running through the 
Upanisads, one which regards the absolute as pure being 
and makes the world an accidental appearance (vivarta) of 
it, and the other which looks upon the absolute as a concrete 
person of whom the world is the necessary expression. 1 The 
former view is nearer fsamkara’s and the latter nearer Rama- 
nuja’s. I confess that “it is difficult to decide whether it is 
the Advaita (or non-dualism) of Sarhkara or the modified 
position of Ramanuja that is the final teaching of the parent 
gospel.’’ * 

The only intelligible reconciliation between two such 
apparently discordant notes seems to be through the device 
of a duality of standpoints. When we rise above the in- 
tellectual level and intuit the nature of reality, we see that 
there is nothing but the absolute, and the world is only the 
absolute, and the problem of the relation between the two does 
not arise, since the absolute and the world are not two distinct 
entities which require to be related. When we envisage the 
absolute from the human end, through the logical categories, 
we tend to view it as a whole which binds together the different 
elements in it. The absolute is looked upon as a personal 
God by whose power of self-expression or maya the world is 
sustained. The absolute as pure being (Saihkara) and the 
absolute as a person (Ramanuja) are the intuitional and the 
intellectual representations of the one supreme fact. 3 As 
these two lines of thought cross and re-cross in the Upanisads, 
Sarhkara and Ramanuja were able to support their views from 
them. As we shall see, Samkara adopts this device of a duality 
of standpoints in attempting to harmonise the different texts 
of the Upanisads. 

' See pp. 168, 172-173, 184-186, 202. * Pp. 258-259. 

I See pp. 1C8, 172, 180-1S1, 184-185, 258-259. 

vol. r * 22* 



67 (> 


INDIAN PHILOSOPHY 


IV 

In my account of early Buddhism, I attempted to make 
out that it is “ only a restatement of the thought of the 
Upanisads ” with a new emphasis. 1 In spite of the absence 
of any specific reference to the Upanisads, it is admitted that 
the teaching of Buddha is considerably influenced by the 
thought of the Upanisads. 1 Indifference to Vedic authority 3 
and ceremonial pietyd belief in the law of karma, rebirth 5 
and the possibility of attaining moksa or nirvana 6 and the 
doctrine of the non-permanence of the world and the individual 
self i are common to the Upanisads and Buddha. While 
Buddha adopts the position of the Upanisads in holding that 
absolute reality is not the property of anything on earth, that 
the world of samsara is a becoming without beginning or end, 
he does not definitely affirm the reality of the absolute, the self 
and the state of liberation. He does not tell us about the state 
of the enlightened after death, whether it is existent, non- 
existent, both or neither, about the nature of the self and 
the world, whether they are eternal, non-eternal, both or 
neither, whether they are self-made, made by another, both 
or neither. As a matter of fact these questions were reserved 
issues on which Buddha did not allow any speculation. While 
there is no doubt that Buddha refused to dogmatise on these 
problems, it is still an interesting question, if it can be answered 
at all, what exactly the implications of this refusal are. 

The three questions, whether there is an absolute reality 
exempt from the changes of the world, whether there is a 
permanent self distinct from the changing aggregates, and 

1 P. 361 ; see also pp. 375 ff. 

1 As orthodox a Hindu thinker as Kumarila declares that even the 
Buddhist views of subjectivism, momentariness and non-self theory di rive 
their inspiration from the Upanisads. “ Vijnanamatraksanabhanganaira- 
tmyadivadanam api upanisatprabhavatvam.” Tanlravatthka, i. 3. 2. 

3 Mundaka Up., i. 1. 5. 

4 Ibid., 2, 7-xo; Brh. Up., i. 4. 15. 

I Chan. Up., v. 10. 7; Katha, v. 7; Ssvet, v. 11-12. 

6 Chan. Up., iv. 15. 5-6; Brh., vi. 2. 15, Svet, i. 7. 8. II. 

^ The changing character of the world is di noti d by the word " jagnt. 
Isa _p., 1; Brh. Up., iii. 1. 3; cf. " sarvain mrtyor annam,” Brh., iii. 2. 10; 
aUo i. 3. 28. In Katha, 1. 12, svarga or heaven is described as a place where 
hunger and thirst, sorrow, old age and death are absent. The futility of the 
greatest earthly pleasures is brought out in Katha, i. 26-^28. 



SOME PROBLEMS 


677 


whether nirvana is a state of positive being, are different sides 
of the one fundamental problem of metaphysics. If there is 
an ultimate reality which is not subject to the laws of the 
world of change, then nirvana is the attainment of this sphere 
of reality and the enlightened one is the permanent self. If 
there is not an absolute reality, then there is no permanent 
self and nirvana is nothingness. The former view is nearer 
the religious idealism of the Upanisads and the latter is nearer 
the negative rationalism of scientific metaphysics. 

Whatever Buddha’s personal views may have beer, he 
declined to engage in discussions about metaphysical ques- 
tions on the ground that they were not helpful to the seeker 
of salvation. His avoidance of all metaphysical themes is 
irritating in its vagueness to the modem historian of philosophy, 
who is anxious to give a label to every thinker and system of 
thought. But Buddha eludes his grasp. Was his silence 
an apology for uncertainty? Was he a mentally timid man 
afraid of speaking out, or was he merely sitting on the fence? 
Was his mind vague and hazy, or was he attempting to avoid 
the danger of being deceived? Was he facing both ways, 
indifferent to the positive and the negative implications of his 
teaching? There are only three alternatives open to us. 
Buddha admitted the reality of the absolute, or did not admit 
its reality, or did not know the truth about it. Let us try 
to determine whether his thought was negative, positive or 
agnostic in character. 

At once we are confronted by the difficulty that we do not 
possess any written record of Buddha’s teachings. The Pali 
Canon came into its present shape long after the death of 
Buddha. It contains matter, some very old and some rather 
late. It is therefore difficult to say with certainty now much 
of the Canonical Buddhism is due to Buddha himself and 
how much is later development. In ancient India, many of 
the discourses and utterances of the teachers were preserved 
in memory by their disciples and transmitted to the genera- 
tions that followed. Such has been the case with the great 
Vedic literature. The same is true of Buddha, who founded 
in his lifetime a regular order and gathered round himself a 
body of disciples who became the representatives of his teach- 
ing. Though we cannot be sure that we have the ipsissima 



678 


INDIAN PHILOSOPHY 


verba of Buddha, there is no doubt that we possess, to a con- 
siderable extent, the substance and the profound depth of his 
teaching. If we doubt the authenticity of Buddha’s great 
deliverances on the four noble truths, the eightfold path, and 
the exhortations attributed to him in the Mahaparinibbana 
Suita and Sutta Nipdta, we may as well doubt the authenticity 
of the teachings attributed to Yajnavalkya, Sandifya and 
Uddalaka. 1 Attempts are made to date the agnostic or the 
negative or positive passages as earlier and assign them 
to Buddha and treat others as the contributions of his followers, 
in the interests of this or that interpretation of early Buddhism. 
But to start with the idea that all passages which conflict 
with one’s reading of Buddha’s silence are later, is to argue 
in a circle; for the ground on which they are regarded as later 
is just that they contain indications of a different outlook. 
Taking our stand on the texts which are generally acknowledged 
to be Buddha’s, let us try to find out what metaphysical stand- 
point they suggest. 


V 

The negative interpretation of his silence is the most 
popular one. Hindu thinkers, early Buddhists and many 
modern students of Indian thought adopt this view. z Buddhist 
studies aroused much interest in the West during the second 
half of the nineteenth century, when men’s minds were swayed 
by scientific metaphysicians like Herbert Spencer and Auguste 
Comte. Naturally Buddhist scholars felt that the silence 
of Buddha was a cloak for negative rationalism. Buddha 
shrank from confessing his faith for fear that he might startle 
his followers out of their wits. If we accept this view, not 
only does Buddha’s philosophy become incoherent, but his 


1 According to Rhys Davids, the four greater Nikayas and the greater 
part of such books of the lesser Nikaya as Itivuttaka and Sutta Nipata are 
as old as 400 B.c. and that of the Vinaya, Muhiivagga, Cullavagga i.-x. is as 
old as 300 b.c. From the representations of the Buddhist stories and legends 
ou the reliefs and monuments of Sanchi, etc., it is clear that about the middle 
of the third century b.c. we had a body of Buddhist texts designated Pitakas 
and divided into five Nikayas. 

* Cp. Professor Macdonell: Buddha " left no doubt about the goal to 
which his teaching led, the cessation of all the samskaras, annihilation of all 
the skandhas. eternal death .” — Hindustan Review, 1923, ,0. 93. 



SOME PROBLEMS 


679 


character also is compromised. There are eve* so many 
passages, admittedly Buddha’s, which cannot be accounted 
for on this view. Besides, the success of Buddha’s teaching 
at a time when the great gods Visnu and Siva were rising 
into prominence will be difficult to explain. We have evidence 
to show that the early converts to Buddhism were religiously 
minded. The Mahasudassana and Cakkavattisihanada Suttan- 
tas reveal to us that the minds of the early Buddhists were 
filled with the legend of the Sun-God. A negative creed was 
not likely to impress the Jatilas or fire-worshippers who were 
among the early converts to Buddhism . 1 A philosophy which 
denies the reality of an ultimate spirit, repudiates the reality 
of the self and promises men annihilation as the reward of a 
virtuous life, is not likely to kindle in the human heart any 
enthusiasm for its founder or fervour for his teaching. To 
assume that such a barren rationalism appealed to the Indian 
heart of the sixth century b.c. is to ignore all laws of psychology. 
So careful a scholar as Professor Berriedale Keith declines to 
believe that Buddha was a negativist. He holds that the 
passages of the Pali Canon which interpret the practical agnos- 
ticism of Buddha as a definite negativism are not to be taken 
as a serious account of Buddha’s teaching . 1 

VI 

The second alternative of agnosticism, which does not 
apparently commit us to any definite view, has had the valu- 
able and impressive support of Professor Keith. He says: “ It 
is quite legitimate to hold that the Buddha was a genuine 
agnostic, that he had studied the various systems of ideas 
prevalent in his day, without deriving any greater satisfaction 
from them than any of us to-day do from the study of modern 
systems, and that he had no reasoned or other conviction 
on the matter. From the general poverty of philosophical 
constructive power exhibited by such parts of the system as 
appear essentially Buddha’s, one is inclined to prefer this 
explanation.” “ Agnosticism in these matters is not based 
on any reasoned conviction of the limits of knowledge; it 
rests on the twofold ground that the Buddha has not himself a 

1 Mahdvagga, i. 15 ff. * Buddhist Philosophy, pp. 47 



680 


INDIAN PHILOSOPHY 


clear conclusion on the truth on these issues, but is convinced 
that disputation on them will not lead to the frame of mind 
which is essential for the attainment of nirvana.” 1 

The “ agnostic ” interpretation which makes out that 
Buddha refused to give answers to metaphysical questions 
simply because he had none to give, is hardly fair to Buddha’s 
genius. If Buddha had himself no theory of life, it would 
have been impossible for him to give a larger meaning and a 
greater depth to life. It cannot be that Buddha voyaged 
through life without a chart, for then his system would be 
unintelligible and his passion for humanity inexplicable. If 
Buddha had no clear convictions on the nature of the ulti- 
mate goal of all striving, if he had no light on the mystery 
of nirvana, how could he say that by perfecting one’s nature 
one would attain the bliss inexpressible? The designation of 
“ Buddha,” “ the enlightened,” which he assumed leads us to 
infer that he had some definite views, right or wrong, on the 
ultimate questions. The depth of conviction which comes 
out in many exhortations to his disciples to follow the Norm 
to reach the truth, is hardly intelligible on the hypothesis of 
agnosticism. “ Let a man of intelligence come to me,” says 
he, “honest, candid, straightforward; I will instruct him, 
teach him the Norm, and if he practice according as he is 
taught, then to know for himself, and to realise that supreme 
religion and goal for the sake of which clansmen go forth from 
the household life into the homeless state will take him — only 
seven days.” 1 Buddha must be either an impostor or a 
deluded man to talk in this strain, if he had no clear views on 
the ultimate questions. 

Besides, this interpretation does not reckon with the 
passages where Buddha says that he does not give out all the 
truths known to him. In the Pdsadika Suttanta ,3 he tells us 
that he does not reveal the truths in his possession, which 
are not likely to help one in one’s moral growth. Samyutta 
Nikaya relates an incident, where Buddha, taking a bunch of 
leaves in his hand, explained to the assembled monks that, as 
the leaves in the forest outnumbered the leaves in his hand, so 
the truths which he knew but had not taught, outnumbered 

* Ibid., pp. 63 and 45. 

1 XJdumbankd Slhandda Suttayita. Digha. N., iii. 56. 3 Ibid., iii. 134. 



SOME PROBLEMS 


681 


the truths which he had taught. While Buddha taught less 
than he knew and believed, his disciples seem to have believed 
rather less than what he had taught them. 

liofessor Keith is not inclined to regard the agnosticism of 
Buddha as a reasoned one. Though it is not logically argued 
out, the view that it is difficult to solve ultimate problems 
by empirical understanding is familiar to the thinkers who 
preceded Buddha. If Buddha refused to say whether the 
world had a beginning or not, it may well be that either alter- 
native seemed to him to be unsatisfactory. If Buddha “ had 
studied the various systems of ideas prevalent in his time,” the 
somewhat reasoned agnosticism of the Upanisads would leap 
up to his eyes. 

It is admitted that the agnosticism of Buddha, if it is 
absolute and not merely pragmatic as in the case of the 
Upanisads, is not creditable to his philosophic power, and 
those who adopt this view of Buddha’s silence are inclined 
to rate him as a philosopher of indifferent quality. But this 
is purely a matter of personal opinion. Buddha’s critical 
attitude to the different metaphysical theories — the sixty-two 
described in the Brahmajala Suita and the ten raised only to 
be set aside as not tending to salvation in the Potthapada 
Sutia 1 — as well as to the religious practices of his time, shows 
that Buddha is a thinker and critic of no mean order. To 
imagine that he was not a close thinker would be to deny 
metaphysical capacity to one who disputed many meta- 
physical schemes. It would be a strange insensibility for 
which there is little proof. Besides, no thinking man, not, 
at any rate, one of Buddha’s intellectual and moral stature, 
could live without some sort of belief about transcendent 
values. 

Those scholars who support the hypothesis of agnosticism 
do so since that view alone fits in with their faith that Buddha’s 
teaching is emphatically a species of primitive thought. They 
reject other interpretations on the ground that they are too 
logical to be primitive. We need not say that the view which 
pictures Buddha as a narrowminded rationalist, an indifferent 
psychologist and a bad philosopher, is hardly calculated 
to convince or even trouble those who do not share the 
> Digha N., i. 1S7 ff. 



682 


INDIAN PHILOSOPHY 


assumptions of the critics. Such a vague dreamer is obviously 
one who could never have had any large religious influence 
even in the India of the sixth century B.c. 

VII 

If we believe that Buddha was not a vague dreamer or a 
hypocrite, but a sincere and earnest soul of an anti-dogmatic 
turn of mind, then a chance phrase or a significant touch may 
contain, to the careful observer, the clue to his general position 
which is the permanent background of his life and thought. 
The spirit of this metaphysics will be all-pervading though it 
may be seldom expressed. 

The emphasis laid by Buddha on the impermanence and 
non-substantiality of the world is plainly in harmony with 
the depreciation of all empirical existence which we find in 
the Upanisads . 1 The crucial question is, whether Buddha’s 
condemnation of the world of experience is the result of his 
acceptance of an absolute reality, as in the case of the Upani- 
sads. When one says that one does not believe in reality 
or God, one only means that one does not believe in the popular 
ideas of them. When Buddha scrapped inadequate con- 
ceptions, it can only be in comparison with a more adequate 
one. As a matter of fact, nowhere did Buddha repudiate 
the Upaxiisad conception of Brahman, the absolute. In the 
Kathavattu, where different controversial points are discussed, 
there is no reference to the question of the reality of an immu- 
table being. All this indicates, if anything, Buddha’s accept- 
ance of the Upanisad position. Besides, the famous sermon 
at Benares suggests strongly the reality of an absolute realm. 
The descriptions of the absolute as neither existent nor non- 
existent, nor both nor neither, remind us of similar passages 
in non-Buddhist texts where they are used to deny not the 
absolute but empirical descriptions of it . 3 

Why, then, did Buddha not admit in express terms the 
reality of the absolute? Buddha refused to describe the 


■ " The wise seek not the stable (dhruvam) among things which are unstable 
(adhruvesu) here,” Katha Up., iv. 2. 

1 R.V., x. 129. 1-2; Brh. Up., ii, 5. 19; iii. 8. 8; Isa Up., 4 and 5; Katha 
Up. iii. 15; Mundaka, i. 1. 6; ii. 2. 1; §vet, vi. 11; Maitrl, iv. 17. 



SOME PROBLEMS 


683 


absolute, for that would be to take a step out of the world of 
relativity, the legitimacy of which he was the first to contest 
in others. The absolute is not a matter of empirical observa- 
tion. The world of experience does not reveal the absolute 
anywhere within its limits. The Upanisads admit as much 
and warn us against applying the categories of the pheno- 
menal world to the ultimate reality. The seer of the Upani- 
sads, when called upon to describe the nature of the absolute, 
kept silent, and when the question was repeated, he persisted 
in his silence and ultimately declared that “ the Atman is 
silence ” (Santo’yam atma). 1 “ Where the eye goes not, 
speech goes not, nor the mind; we know not, we understand 
not how one would teach it.” 2 It is “ other than the known 
and above the unknown.” 3 Often the Upanisads give negative 
descriptions of the absolute. 4 But the conception of the 
absolute as something unknown and incomprehensible, without 
beginning or end, without shape, substance or dwelling-place, 
is too exalted for ordinary people. So the Upanisads indulge 
in positive descriptions to satisfy the interests of religion and 
make known that the unutterable absolute is none the less 
positive in character. While the Upanisads did not dare to 
be loyal to the tremendous admission of the incomprehensi- 
bility of the absolute, Buddha, more consistently, refuses to 
apply any category of the empirical world to the absolute 
reality. While he makes out that the absolute is not the world 
of change, that the self is not the empirical determinations of 
bodily form, perceptions, feelings, dispositions, and intellect, 
that nirvana is not empirical being, he does not say what these 
are, 5 since they are incapable of logical verification. Their 
reality is intuited by the freed, and others have to accept it 
on authority. But when once authority is admitted, there is no 
reason why the authority of the Vedas should not be accepted 
in favour of the Vedic gods. There is no reason why Buddha’s 
view should rank higher than ever so many dreams of the 
human heart and shadows of the human mind which people 

1 S.B., iii. 2. 17. 

* Kena Up., i. 3; see also Katha Up., vi. 12-13; Mundaka, iii. 1. 8. 

3 Kena, i. 4. 

4 Brh. Up., ii. 3. 6; iii. 8. 8; iii. 9. 26; iv.2-4; Katha, iii. 15; Mundaka,i.6. 

s Cp. Augustine: “ We can know what God is not, but not what He is,” 

Trinity, vii. 2. 



C8-1 


INDIAN PHILOSOPHY 


are called upon to accept on the authority of others. The 
Upanisads assert and Buddha agrees, that it is not possible 
for us to attain theoretical certainty on the ultimate questions, 
and those who profess to have attained it are charlatans 
anxious to impose on the vulgar. While Buddha destroyed 
the dogmatism of his predecessors he did not wish to substi- 
tute any dogmatism of his own in its place; for such a 
procedure would encourage disputations which hinder spiritual 
growth. Buddha declares that he does not reveal the truths 
he knows, not only because they are not helpful to the seeker 
of liberation but also because men hold different opinions 
regarding them . 1 In his time, fruitless discussions had 
become almost a mental disease. The Hindu thinkers seemed 
to Buddha to be neglecting the deeper needs of life in their 
anxiety to grapple with the bottomless issues of thought. 
So Buddha exhorted his followers to withdraw from the strife 
of systems and direct their attention to religion as the life 
and the way leading to the attainment of truth. Truth will 
work itself out in us, when we free ourselves from prejudices, 
let reality reflect itself in us and modify our very being. Truth 
is to be found in life itself. It is not a matter of learned con- 
troversy but a spiritual necessity. In view of the obvious 
limits to the logical investigation of reality, Buddha did not 
think it his duty to satisfy the metaphysical craving, though 
he had definite views on the metaphysical questions. 

Within the limits allowed bv logic, Buddha describes the 
ultimate principle of the universe as the law or the dharma. 
The precise significance of the concept of dharma will become 
clear if we look into its previous history in Vedic literature. 
We have in the Rg-Veda the conception of rta as moral and 
physical order. It is not the creation of God but is itself 
divine and independent of the gods who are said to be its 
custodians. The moral order of the world controlling the 
problems of life in its different spheres of law, custom and 
morality is called Dharma. In the Brhadaranyaka Upanisad 

1 Uddua, p. ii ; Samyutta N., v. 437; Digha N., i. 179. To impress the 
incomprehensible character of the absolute by the adoption of the attitude 
of silence is a well-known device. When Vimalakirti was asked to describe 
the nature of the absolute, he remained silent, and Bodhisattva Ma jusri 
exclaimed, “Well done! Well done! Non-duality is truly above words." 
Vwh'Lihuti Sutra. Cp. Suzuki: Mahay ana Buddhism, pp. 106-107. 



SOME PROBLEMS 


685 


it is said that, after creating the classes of Ksatriyas, Vaisyas 
and Sudras, the supreme " created a better form, the law of 
righteousness (dharma). There is nothing higher than the 
law of righteousness (dharmat param nasti). . . . Verily, that 
which is the law of righteousness is truth (satyam). . . . 
Verily both these (satyam and dharma) are the same thing.” 1 * 
The Vedic rta stands for both satya and dharma. 3 4 5 In the 
Tuittinya Upanisad, the perfected soul who has felt the unity 
of his soul with that of the world sings, " I am the firstborn 
of rta (or the Real), earlier than the gods and the centre of 
the immortal.” 3 Similarly, in the Katha Upanisad, where a 
passage from the Rg-Veda^ is substantially repeated, rta 
is identified with the supreme spirit. 5 The supreme Brahman 
is both rta and satya. 6 The identity of dharma and rta 
with satya is a doctrine as old as the Rg-Veda and the 
Upanisads. The one absolute reveals itself to the philoso- 
phically minded as Eternal Truth or Reality, and the way to 
it is through wisdom (j liana) and faith (Sraddha). This is the 
view which the Upanisads emphasise. To those religiously 
inclined, the absolute seems to be Eternal Love and the way 
to it is through love (priti) and devotion (bhakti). This view 
is stressed by some of the later Upanisads, the BhagavaJgitd 
and the Puranas. Those who are ethically disposed look 
upon the absolute as Eternal Righteousness and hold that 
we can attain it through service and self-sacrifice. The one 
absolute which is at once Light, Love and Life reveals itself 
in different ways to the seekers of different temperaments. 

Buddha’s whole attitude is a predominantly ethical one, 
and naturally the ethical aspect of the absolute, its character 
as righteousness, appeals to him most. The place assigned 

1 i. 4. 14. See also Brh. Up., iv. 15. i, Isa Up., 15; The face of the 
real is covered over with a golden vessel; O Pusan, do thou uncover that, for 
one whose law i$ the real (satyadharmaya) to see." See also R.V., iv. 5. 5; 
vii. 104. 8; ix. 113. 4; x. 190. 1. 

1 Rta has for its negative an-rta which is a-satya as well as a-tlharma. 

3 Aham asm! prathamaja rta’sya, purvam devcbhyo nabha yi. 

4 iv. 40. 5; see also Vajasanevi Snmhita, x 24; xii. 14; Tail. Sam., iii. 2. 
10. 1; Sat. Brah., vi. 7. 3. 11; Tait. Aran., vi. 1. 5. 6. Rangara.ma.nu3a, 
commenting on Katha, v. 2. identifies rt am with aparicchinnasatyaxupa 
brahmatniakam. 

5 V,, 2; see $amkara on Tait., iii. 10 and Katha, v. 2. 

6 Rtam satyam param brahma. Tait. Aran., vi. 13. 27. 12. 



686 


INDIAN PHILOSOPHY 


by the Upanisads to Brahman is given to dharma by Buddha. 1 
Dharma controls all things. In the Agaiina Sutlanta, the 
evolution of the world and the gradation of beings in it are 
said to be conditioned by the principle of dharma. 5 Brahma- 
cakra or the wheel of Brahman becomes dhammacakka or the 
wheel of the law. The path of the Brahman is called the way 
of the dharma.3 The eightfold path is called indiscriminately 
the Brahmayana or the dharmayana. The Tathagata is said 
to have Brahman or dharma as his body. He is said to 
become one with Brahman or one with dharma. 4 There are 
many passages in the Pali Canon where we are called upon to 
pay homage and reverence to the dharma.5 In Milinda, 
dharma is personified as the god of righteousness. 6 Dharma 
is the highest reality and the things of the world are dharmas, 
as they are the manifestations of the one ultimate principle. 

On the ground that bodily form, perceptions, feelings, dis- 
positions and intellect are non-permanent, Buddha denies to 

* Cp. Rabindranath Tagore: “ This dharma and the Brahman of the 
Upanisads are essentially the same . . . Dharma in Buddhism is an eternal 
reality of Peace, Goodness and Love for which man can offer up the homage 
of his highest loyalty, his life itself. This dharma can inspire man with 
almost superhuman power of renunciation, and through the abnegation of 
self lead him to the supreme object of his existence, a state that cannot be 
compared to anything we know in this world, and yet of which we can at 
least have a dim idea, when we know that it is only to be reached, not through 
the path of annihilation, but through immeasurable love. Thus to dwell in 
the constant consciousness of unbounded love is named by Lord Buddha, 
Brahmavihara or moving in Brahman," Visvabhurati Quarterly, 1924, 
PP- 385-386. 

J Digha N., iii. 80 ff. 

3 Samyutta N„ i. 141 ; v. 5 ; Theragdtha, 689. 

4 Buddha when he attained nirvana is said to have become " dharma- 
dhatusvabhavatmaka." 

5 Samyutta N., ii. 138; Anguttara N„ ii. 20. 

6 Cp. Sat. Brah., xiii, 4. 3. 14. Cp. Poussin: "If the Buddhists admit 
neither judge nor creator, at least they recognise a sovereign and infallible 
justice — a justice of wonderful insight and adaptability, however mechanically 
it acts. ... In my opinion it is a calumny to accuse the Buddhists of 
atheism ; they have at any rate taken full cognisance of one of the aspects 
of the divine” (quoted in Buddha's Way of Virtue, p. 13). Mr. Saunders 
says: “ His (Buddha’s) serene faith in righteousness and in reality of the 
unseen, intangible values may be called religious; and vve may well believe 
that knowing his people and their genius for religion, he believed that he 
might safely leave them to work out a religious interpretation of this law 
of causality.” Mr. Saunders thinks that Buddha's insistence on the law of 
karma and dharma is a " notable contribution to an ethical theism ” ( Epochs 
of Buddhist History, p. 3). 



SOME PROBLEMS 


687 


them the character of self. 1 The changing character of the 
empirical self is illustrated by the metaphors of fire and the 
movement of water. The Sermon at Benares does not deny 
the existence of a self distinct from the changing empirical 
aggregates. Buddha declines to deny the reality of a per- 
manent self in his conversation with Vacchagotta. The 
Lamkavatara, a work written centuries after Buddha, suggests 
that Buddha accepted the “ self ” theory only to beguile his 
hearers. It is unnecessary to assume that Buddha lowered 
his standards for the sake of expediency, when other explana- 
tions are available. When Buddha argues that nirvana can 
be normally attained before the bodily death of the sage, and 
equates it with happiness of the highest order accompanied 
by the consciousness of the destruction of all rebirth, he 
tacitly admits the reality of the self. When he declares that 
the character of the enlightened one is beyond nature, and 
protests against the accusation that he teaches the destruction 
of the real, 2 he admits that the destruction of the five con- 
stituents does not touch the real self. The Dhammapada 
makes the self the lord of self and the witness of its good and 
evil.3 In the Samkhya and the Advaita Vedanta, we have an 
exclusion from the self of all that belongs to the not-self, in the 
spirit of the Upanisads and Buddhism. 

But Buddha could not confirm the reality of the self on 
empirical evidence. So he declines to answer questions about 
the non-phenomenal self, whether it was one with or different 
from the aggregates. r He did not so much deny the per- 
manent self as speculations about it. Referring to six different 
speculations about the nature of the self, Buddha says: “ This, 
0 monks, is a walking in mere opinion, a resorting to mere 
views, a barren waste of views, an empty display of views.” 5 
Pudgalavada or belief in a permanent self was held by one 
branch of Buddha’s early disciples. Kathdvattu attributes 
it to the Sammitiyas and Vajjiputtakas. We have in the 
Samyutta Nikaya the sutra of the burden-bearer. 6 'I he 

1 See Mahavagga, i. 6. 38; Majjhima N., 35; Mahanidana Sutta : DIgha N., 
ii. 66. 

1 Alagadditpama Sutta: Majjhima N., i. 140. 

3 160. 

« Majjhima N., i. 256. 

5 Sllaciira : Dialogues of Buddha, vol. i„ p. 6. 6 ‘ ^ 2 5 . 



688 


INDIAN PHILOSOPHY 


Buddhist commentators, Buddhaghosa, Vasubandhu, Candra- 
klrti and Yasomitra, who are inclined to a negative interpre- 
tation of Buddha’s teaching, explain it away, though it is 
difficult to believe that the changing aggregates are both the 
burden and the bearer thereof. 

It is generally admitted at the present day that it is wrong 
to identify nirvana with an “ eternity of nothingness.” The 
word “ nirvana ” means literally extinction, and what is ex- 
tinguished is “ craving, sorrow, rebirth.” 1 The earliest con- 
ception of nirvana is that it is an inexplicable state which 
can be attained even here and now 2 by the complete destruc- 
tion of thirst (tanha) and the defilements of mind. 3 It is a 
real condition where sarirsara terminates and an ineffable peace 
is attained. 4 Apannka Suita describes nirvana in words sug- 
gestive of the moksa of the Upanisads. “ Not tormenting 
himself, not tormenting others, already in this lifetime, no 
longer hungry, extinguished, come to coolness, feeling himself 
well, he dwells with self that has become Brahman. ”5 The 
beautiful poetry of the Thera- and the Theri-gathas is inspired 
by ideas of the freedom and joy of nirvana. 

We cannot adequately describe the nature of nirvana since 
it is not an object of logical knowledge. Though it is felt by 
those who share it as strongly positive, conceptually it is a 
negative state. Nirvana is the negation of the empirical 
being bound by the law of karma or samsara. " There is, 
O monks, that which is neither earth nor water, neither fire 
nor air, neither infinity of space nor infinity of consciousness, 
nor nothingness nor perception, neither this world nor that 
world, neither sun nor moon.” “ Where there is neither 
death nor birth, there neither is this world nor that, nor in 
between — it is the end of sorrow.” 6 But it is not non-being. 

■ Malidvagga, vi. 31. 7; S.B.E., vol. xiii. 

3 See Brahmajala Suita : D.N., i. 

J Nandi samyojano luko vitakkasa vicarana 
Tanhaya vippahanena nibbanam ity ucyati. 

Sutta Nipata, 1109; see also 1087. 

4 Majjhima N., 139. Cp. P.ofessor Keith: "That nirvana is real . . . 
oubtless accords with the general tone of the Canon itself” ( Buddhist 

philosophy, p. S3). 

5 Anattantapo aparantapo ditthe ve dhamme nicchato nibbuto sltibhuto 
sukhapati-ainvedl biahmabhutena attana viharati, — M N., i. 412. 

4 Uddna, viii. 1 ; see also ii. 10, and Itivuttaka. 



SOME PROBLEMS 


689 


" There is something unborn, unoriginated, unmade, uncom- 
pounded; were there not such a thing, there would be no 
escape from that which is born, originated, made and com- 
pounded.” 1 There is thus authority for the interpretation of 
nirvana as something uncreate and endless 2 3 4 5 or as an un- 
compounded element different from the passing world. 3 
Uddna alludes to the fate of the enlightened who have attained 
nirvana. Even as the path of the fire when extinguished 
cannot be traced, even so the path of those who are completely 
freed cannot be traced. The Upanisads 4 compare the 
supreme self with the fire the fuel of which has been consumed. 
Only the extinction of the fuel does not destroy the fire which 
ceases to be visible. 5 As the Upanisads distinguish ultimate 
release (moksa) from the attainment of heaven (svarga), so 
Buddha distinguishes nirvana from existence in paradise and 
warns his followers that desire for blissful existence in the 
formless world (arupaloka) is one of the fetters which prevent 
the attainment of nirvana. 

Buddha evidently admitted the positive nature of nirvana. 
Sariputra dismisses Yamaka’s view of nirvana as the night of 
nothingness, as a heresy. 6 * In the interesting conversation 
between King Pasenadi of Kosala and the nun Khema, it is 
admitted that nirvana is an ineffable state which does not 
lend itself to empirical description. The deep nature of the 
Tathagata cannot be fathomed, even as the sands of the 
Ganges or the waterdrops in the ocean cannot be reckoned. 7 
Buddha refuses to answer all questions about the nature of 
nirvana, since the questions impede moral progress 8 and 


1 Uddna, viii. 3. 10. Cp. Chan. Up., viii. 13. 1, where the Brahma-worid 
into which the perfected pass is said to be uncreated, akrtam. The state of 
release is described as uncreated, akrtah — Mundaka Up., i. 2. 12. 

* Milinda, p. 271. 

3 See Psychological Ethics, pp. 367 £f. 

4 Svct Up. 

5 Cp. Keith: “There is no doubt that the Indian idea of the extinction 
of fire was not that which occurs to us of utter annihilation, but rather that 
the flame returns to the primitive, pure, invisible state of fire in which it 
existed prior to its manifestation in the form of visible fire “ (Buddhist 
Philosophy, pp. 63-66). 

6 Sariiyutta N., Hi. 109. 

1 Ibid., iv. 374; Majjbima N„ i. 487. 

* Samyutta N.,.i,i. 223; Majjhima, 63. 



690 


INDIAN PHILOSOPHY 


nirvana is inconceivable (ananuvejjo). “ Whereof one cannot 
speak, thereof one must be silent.” 1 

VIII 

The scientifically minded students of Buddhism tend to 
interpret the teaching of Buddha as a negative rationalism. 
Those who are impressed by the futility of modern attempts 
at metaphysical system-building are inclined to construe 
Buddha’s doctrine as one of agnosticism; and if they come 
across inconvenient passages, they declare that they are the 
work of Buddha’s followers. Professor Keith recognises that 
a positive philosophy affirming the reality of the absolute, 
the self and nirvana, can be traced to the Canon, but he is 
reluctant to attribute it to the Buddha himself and so gives 
the credit for it to “ a section at any rate of his early fol- 
lowers.” 2 The different readings of Buddha’s silence on 
metaphysical questions are motived by different acts of 
faith.3 An impartial historian must strive not only for 
accuracy in his statements but also justice in his apprecia- 
tions. While it is his duty to recognise the inconsistencies 
in a system, he must endeavour, if his interpretation is to be 
fruitful, to account for them by discriminating the essential 

1 Cp. Aurobindo Ghosh: “ The ideal of nirvana was only a negative and 
exclusive statement of the highest Vedantic spiritual experience " (Arya, vi., 
p. ioi). According to Friedrich Heiler, “ nirvana is, althoughit might sound 
a paradox, in spite of all conceptional negativity nothing but 'eternal salva- 
tion ’ after which the heart of the religious yearns on the whole earth ” 
(quoted in the New Pali-Eiiglish Dictionary). The later schools of Buddhism, 
which interpret nirvana as conscious union with the universal Buddha or 
the awakening of the Buddha-self in the human heart, are nearer Buddha’s 
teaching than those which view it as the cessation of all existence 
whatsoever. 

3 Baddist Philosophy , pp. 63-64. 

3 Referring to the place of faith in the interpretation of philosophies of 
an earlier age, where we are wholly confined to written records, “ usually 
fragmentary, often second-hand or of doubtful authority,” Professor Burnet 
says : “ A man who tries to spend his life in sympathy with the ancient philo- 
sophers will sometimes find a direct conviction forcing itself upon him, the 
grounds of which can only be represented very imperfectly by a number of 
references in a footnote. Unless the enumeration of passages is complete — 
and it can never be complete — and unless each passage tells exactly in the 
same way, which depends on its being read in the light of innumerable other 
passages not consciously present to memory, the so-called proofs will not 
produce the same effect on any two minds ” ( Creek Philosophy, pp. 1-2). 



SOME PROBLEMS 


691 


from the accidental. It is not fair to insist on negativism or 
agnosticism where another explanation is not merely possible 
but is probably more in accordance with the ideas of the 
teaching of the early Canon. The “ agnostic ” interpreter 
makes Buddha’s silence a cloak for ignorance and the “ nega- 
tive ” interpreter looks upon it as an act of cowardice. On 
the former view, Buddha did not know the truth, but tried 
to save his face by evading all questions and asserting that 
they were unnecessary. On the latter he had definite views, 
but since he had not the courage to oppose established opinions, 
he kept his views to himself. Those who regard Buddha 
as one of the world’s greatest men, of whom what Plato said 
of Socrates in the Phaedo is not untrue, that he was “ the 
best, and also the wisest and most righteous of his time,” may 
be excused if they do not agree with the assumptions of the 
“ negative ” and the “ agnostic ” interpreters. If we do not 
want to compromise the philosophical power or the moral 
greatness of Buddha, we must accept the positive interpreta- 
tion. It alone accounts for Buddha’s metaphysical com- 
missions and omissions and his ethical teaching which is a 
logical deduction from his metaphysics. It relates Buddha 
to his spiritual surroundings and makes his thought con- 
tinuous with that of the Upanisads. The history of a nation’s 
thought is an organic growth and not a mere succession of 
change on change. 

IX 

If Buddha accepts the metaphysical standpoint of the 
Upanisads, how is it that Buddhism is regarded as a heresy 
by the Hindu thinkers? What is the explanation for the 
cleavage between the Hindu and the Buddhist systems of 
religion and culture ? 

The Hindu quarrels not so much with the metaphysical 
conceptions of Buddha as with his practical programme. 
Freedom of thought and rigidity in practice have marked the 
Hindu from the beginning of his history. The Hindu will 
accept as orthodox the Samkhya and the Purva Mhnamsa 
systems of thought, regardless of their indifference to theism, 
but will reject Buddhism in spite of its strong ethical and 
spiritual note, for the simple reason that the former do not 



692 


INDIAN PHILOSOPHY 


interfere with the social life and organisation, while the 
latter insists on bringing its doctrine near to the life of the 
people. 

In deducing the consequences of the Upanisad philosophy 
with incomparable beauty and logic, Buddha showed the in- 
consistencies in the beliefs and practices of those who paid lip 
allegiance to the Upanisads. While the bold speculators of 
the Upanisads adventured on the naked peaks of the absolute, 
the masses of men were allowed to worship their little gods 
and perform the sacrificial ceremonies which they were 
supposed to demand. The elaborate sacrificial religion failed 
to command the confidence of the thoughtful in Buddha’s 
time. As a matter of fact, the Vanaprasthas and the Yatis 
were exempted from them, and the doubt naturally arose 
whether even the householders could not dispense with the 
costly and complicated ritual. Buddha protested against 
those who were standing still in the letter and proclaimed 
that salvation was not external and legal but inward and 
spiritual. 

The Upanisads advocated the principle of ahimsa or non- 
violence but not unreservedly. The Vedic outlook was so 
strongly entrenched that the Upanisads suffered Vedic institu- 
tions even if they were against the main spirit of their teach- 
ing. For example, the Chandogya Upanisad declares that 
the aspirant after release should, among other things, “ never 
give pain to other creatures except at certain holy places,’ 
i.e. during animal sacrifices . 1 But the slaughter of animals 
was in the highest degree offensive to Buddha 2 and he dis- 
allowed absolutely animal sacrifices. 

While the Upanisads tolerated, even if they did not en- 
courage the caste rules, Buddha’s scheme definitely under- 
mined the institution of caste. He declared that individuals 

1 Ahimsan sarvabhutany anyatra tirthebhyah, viii. 15. 

1 See Kutadanta Sutta : DIgha N., i. 127. Though Buddha insisted on a 
rigorous discipline for the monks, he did not interfere with the socio- 
religious practices of his discipies so long as they did not conflict with 
his central principles. He allowed the Brahmin Kutadanta to pcrlorm the 
sacrifices which did not involve the killing of animals. Kumara Kassapa, 
an immediate disciple of Buddha, instructs Prince Payasi that sacrifices 
which do not involve any cruelty are better than those which do. See 
Payasi Suttanta : Dlgha N., li. The highest sacrifice according to Buddha 
is love of humanity and mora 1 life. See Chan. lip., iii. 16 and 17. 



SOME PROBLEMS 


C93 


were higher or lower not according to their birth but accord- 
ing to their character . 1 While the Brahmins reserved the 
study of the sacred scriptures to the members of the three 
" twiceborn ” castes, Buddha abolished all such restrictions. 
Admitting the intellectual pre-eminence of the Brahmins, 
Buddha ranked along with them the Sramanas and opened 
the latter order to the Sudras and the Candalas. Sunlta, 
the sweeper, was as readily taken into the fold as the high 
caste Brahmin. 2 

In spite of the reforms which he wished to introduce, 
Buddha lived and died in the belief that he was restoring the 
principles of the venerable Aryan faith. He did not think 
of himself as the founder of a new religion, though he was 
anxious to purify Brahmanical Hinduism and revivify the 
society round him. But the pioneers of progress are regarded 
in every age, with not unnatural suspicion, as the champions 
of revolt and rebellion. By putting spiritual brotherhood in 
place of hereditary priesthood, personal merit in place of 
distinctions of birth, logical reason in place of Vedic revelation, 
moral life in place of ceremonial piety, and the perfected sage 
above the Vedic gods, Buddha provoked the wrath of the 
Hindu priest who regarded him as an anti-social force. What 
made Buddha and his followers unpardonable heretics in the 
eyes of the Brahmin priests is the social revolution which 
they preached. There is nothing in the doctrine of Buddha 
which cannot be reconciled with Hindu thought; but the 
conflict between a social system based on Brahmanical 
supremacy and one which denied it is radical. In theological 
discussions, which are generally heated, every dissenter is an 
atheist. If one does not share our illusions, he is a heretic; 
if he adopts a different standard of morality, he is immoral. 
The protagonist of the Vedic sacrificial religion regarded 
Buddha as an enemy of the faith. When Buddha approached 
Bharadvaja the Brahmin, as he was performing a sacrifice 
to the fire, the latter cried out, “ Stop there, O shaven-headed 

• AgannaSuttanta: DIghaN.,iii.; SariiyuttaN.,ii. 138; AnguttaraN..ii. 20. 

2 Kassapasihandda Sutta \ Satnannaphala Sutta, 14; Asoka s Inscriptions 
at Girnir and Sahabajgar. See also Vinaya Pitaka, vol. ii., and Madhurd 
Sutta . Cp. “ The ksatriya is the best of this folk who put their trust in lineage. 
But he who is perfect in wisdom and righteousness, he is the best among gods 
and men " {Ambattha Sutta). 



694 


INDIAN PHILOSOPHY 


one, there 0 Samanaka, there thou of low caste.” 1 Hindu 
orthodoxy adopted a similar attitude whenever there were 
protests against the Vedic religion. Mandana Misra rebuked 
fsamkara for subordinating Vedic piety to knowledge of the 
absolute.* Buddha’s revolt is not against the metaphysics 
of the Upanisads but against Brahmanical Hinduism. The 
schism became wider as the followers of Buddha acquired the 
zeal characteristic of the professors of a new learning, and 
developed their doctrine in a way opposed to the growing 
tradition of the Vedanta. The negative view of Buddha’s 
teaching is embodied in the Kathavattu and the Questions o) 
King Milinda as well as in the classics of the Hinayana and 
the Mahayana forms. No wonder the scholiasts of the Vedanta 
subject the different types of Buddhism to a severe criticism. 


X 

The four Buddhist schools profess to be loyal to the 
teaching of Buddha who discovered the elements of existence 
(dhamma), their causal connection, and the method to suppress 
their efficiency for ever. As against the Ajivakas who denied 
the influence of the past on the present, since the past was 
dead and irrecoverably gone, Buddha affirmed that " every- 
thing exists ” though things were looked upon as combinations 
of forces (sarhskarasamuha). Buddha maintained the existence 
of all things in the interests of moral life. The Sarvastivadins 
(the Vaibhasikas and the Sautrantikas) uphold a pluralistic 
realism. The namarupa of the Upanisads was elaborated by 
the Buddhists into the elements of matter (rupa) and the 
four mental factors (nama) of perceptions, feelings, disposi- 
tions and intellect. Sense-data are matter and the other 
four constitute the soul. Often the elements of existence 
are classified into the six receptive faculties (sadayatana), the 

■ Tatr’eva mundaka, tatr’eva samanaka, tatr’eva vasalaka, titthahi. 

* “ At that time, while Mandana Misra, having invited all the gods by the 
invocation of Salagrama, was washing his hand of the darbha grass, he saw 
the feet of Saihkaracarya inside the sanctified circle. On inspection of his 
person he knew him to be a sannyasin and was in a moment ruffled with 
clamorous wrath and cried out, ' Whence comes this shaven-headed man ? ’ 
(Kuto mundi). Anandagiri: Samkaravijaya. 



SOME PROBLEMS 


695 


five senses and man as and their sixfold objects . 1 The 
objects of manas are non-sensuous and are of sixty-four 
kinds. Sometimes in addition to the five senses, manas and 
the sixfold objects, six modes of consciousness are mentioned 
and we get the eighteen dhatus. Strictly speaking, there 
cannot be any distinction between internal and external or any 
real interaction between the separate elements, though popular 
usage indulges in these unauthorised conceptions. Both 
matter and mind are transformed into continuously flowing, 
discrete moments, of impenetrable stuff in the case of matter 
and of consciousness in the case of mind. These sense-data 
and elements of mind are regarded as obeying causal laws. 
But causation, with reference to momentary entities which 
simply appear and disappear but do not move or change, 
acquires a new meaning. It is only pratityasamutpada 
or dependent origination. One state springs into being 
after another. There is no question of one state producing 
another. 

According to the theory of pluralistic realism, knowledge 
is nothing more than the compresence of consciousness with 
the object. As Professor Stcherbatsky puts it: "A moment 
of colour (rupa), a moment of the sense of vision matter 
(caksuh) and a moment of pure consciousness (citta) arising 
simultaneously, in close contiguity constitute what is called 
a sensation (sparsa) of colour.” 1 It means that the element 
of consciousness appears qualified by an object and supported 
by a sense organ. Consciousness does not apprehend the 
sense organ but only the object, since there is a special relation 
of co-ordination (sarupya) between the two. Consciousness 
is said to apprehend even as a light is said to move. The 
Abhidharmakosa says: “ The light of a lamp is a common 
metaphorical designation for an uninterrupted production of 
a series of flashing flames. When this production changes 
its place, we say the light has moved. Similarly, conscious- 
ness is a conventional name for a chain of conscious moments. 
When it changes its place (i.e. appears in co-ordination with 


• The elements are classified into skandhas. ayatanas and dhatus. See 
Theragatha, 1255. 

* Trayanam sannipatah sparSah (The Central Conception of Buddhism 

P-55). ' 



696 


INDIAN PHILOSOPHY 


another objective element) we say that it apprehends that 
object.” 1 We have only a series of evanescent flashings of 
consciousness itself, but there is nothing that cognises. In 
the continuity of conscious moments, the previous moment 
is the cause of the succeeding one. 

From this view it is but a step to the Vijnanavada of the 
Yogacaras, which reduces all the elements into aspects of 
one receptacle consciousness (alayavijnana). Elements of 
existence (dharmas) are products of thought. Objects rise 
into consciousness as the result of our past experiences. The 
external world is the creation of our thought to which we 
give names and ideas. 2 3 The theory of the overflowing stream 
of thought in which the preceding moment is the cause of the 
succeeding one, where the two are bound together by the 
relation of mere samanantaratva, gives place to the doctrine 
of a substantial universal consciousness (alaya) of which the 
mental states are the modifications (parinama). The concep- 
tion of the degrees of unreality is a tacit recognition of an 
absolute reality. Individual ideas are unreal (nihsvabhava) : 
firstly, because they are logical constructions (parikalpita) with 
no corresponding reality in the extra-mental world; secondly, 
because they are only contingently real (paratantra) ; and 
thirdly, because they are all merged in the one reality (pari- 
nispanna) of the absolute (tathata). The individual elements 
are not real in themselves, but have their reality in the absolute, 
which is of the nature of pure consciousness undifferentiated 
into subject and object (grahya grahaka rahita).3 Since the 
absolute is immanent in the world, all that is necessary for 
the attainment of nirvana is a change of outlook. The mystic 
power of the Yoga helps us to see the things of the world sub 
specie aeternitatis. Samsara to the unregenerate is nirvana 
to the regenerate. But the Yogacara does not carefully 
discriminate between the individual and the universal con- 
sciousness. When he makes out that the distinctions of 
knower, known and knowledge are not real, but are due to a 
beginningless defilement of consciousness, when he compares 


1 IX : See Stcherbatsky, The Central Conception of Buddhism, p. 57. 

* Namasamjfiavyavahara. Lamkiivatdva Sutra, p. S5. 

3 Advayalaksanam vijfiaptimatram. See Stcherbatsky: The Conception 
of Buddhist Nirvana, pp. 32-33. 1 



SOME PROBLEMS 


697 


the relation of particular conscious states to the universal 
consciousness to one of waves to the sea, when he admits 
the eternal reality of tathata and regards it as the only 
uncompounded reality (asarhskrtadharma) and relegates all 
else to the region of relativity, when he reduces all dharmas 
to modes of one fundamental essence; he tacitly admits the 
reality of an absolute consciousness, though the subjectivistic 
tendency makes itself heard quite frequently. The Mad- 
hyamikas subject the Yogacara theory to a searching 
scrutiny. They contend that we cannot have any self- 
consciousness (svasamvitti), for a thing cannot act on itself. 
The finger cannot touch itself, nor can the knife cut itself. 
The Madhyamikas view all the elements of existence as con- 
tingent on one another and so declare the world to be empty 
of reality or sunya. Sunya is also said to be the funda- 
mental truth of all existence. Almost all students of Nagar- 
juna’s MacLhyamika metaphysics regard his system as nihilistic. 1 
In my account of it, 2 I made out that it was more positive 
than it was generally represented to be. I urged that Nagar- 
juna believed in an ultimate reality, which was sunya only 
in the sense that it was devoid of all empirical determinations. 
Let us try to determine whether Nagarjuna’s ultimate reality 
is or is not a stupendous void, an unmitigated negation. 


XI 

There is no doubt about Nagarjuna’s conception of the 
world as unreal or sunya. We mean by real any entity which 
has a nature of its own (svabhava), which is not produced 
by causes (akrtaka), which is not dependent on anything else 
(paratra nirapeksa).3 Whatever is relative or dependent is 
unreal, sunya (svabhava-sunya). The real is the independent 
uncaused being.4 The world of experience is bound by 
the relations of subject and object, substance and attribute, 
actor and action, existence and non-existence, origination, 
duration and destruction, unity and plurality, whole and 

1 Kern: Manual , p. 126; Jacobi: A.O.J., xxxi., p. 1; Keith: Buddhist 
Philosophy, pp. 237, 239, 247, 261. 

1 Pp. 643 ff. 3 M.K., xv. 2. 

4 Asunyam . . . apratltyasamutpannam . M. Vrtti, 403. 



698 


INDIAN PHILOSOPHY 


part, bondage and release, relations of time, relations of space; 
and Nagarjuna examines every one of these relations and 
exposes their contradictions. 1 If non-contradiction is the 
test of reality, then the world of experience is not real. The 
world is neither pure being nor pure non-being. Pure being is 
not an existence or an item of the world process; pure non- 
being is not a valid concept, for, were it so, absolute nothingness 
will be an entity, and what is by definition the negation of all 
existence will become an existent. Nothing is not a thing. 
Existence is a becoming. Things of the world are not but 
always become. They ever supersede themselves. They are 
neither self-existent nor non-existent, since they are perceived 
and induce action and produce effects. Lalitavistara says: 
“ There is no object which is existent nor is there any which is 
non-existent. One who knows the chain of conditional exist- 
ence passes beyond both.” 2 Nagarjuna opens his work with 
the statement that things are neither transient nor eternal, 
neither produced nor destroyed, neither same nor different, 
neither coming forth nor passing away. 3 There is no real 
production (samutpada), but only conditioned (pratitya) 
relative, apparent production. There is no real destruction 
but only apparent destruction (pratitya-samuccheda) ; so 
with the rest. All things of the universe are conditioned and 
relative only. “ Sunya ” is the term used by Nagarjuna to 
designate the conditioned character of the world.4 If a thing 
were real and unconditioned, then it must be free from origin 
and destruction. 5 There are no objects in the world which 
are not subject to change and so the world is sunya. 

Nagarjuna, as the upholder of the middle path, does not 
dismiss the world as mere illusion. His attack is directed 
against the theory of the self-existence of things, but does 


■ Pp. 645 fi. 

» Na ca punar iha kaScid asti dharmah 

So’pi na vidyati yasya nasti bhavah 
Hetukriyaparariipara ya jane 
Tasya na bholiha astinastibbavah. — (Chap, xxv.l 

1 Anirodham anutpadam anucchedam asasvatam 

Anekartliam ananartbam anagamam anirgamam. 

* Yah pratityasamutpadah sunyatam tarn pravaksyate. — M.K., xxiv. 

Sunyah sarvadharmah nihsvabhavayogrna. PrajSaparamiid. 

5 Yady asunyam idam sarvam udayo nasti na vyayalj. — M.K., xxiv. 



SOME PROBLEMS 


699 


not in any way impair the conditioned existence of things. 
Candraklrti, commenting on Nagarjuna, says: “ Our argu- 
ment that objects are not self-existent affects the reality of the 
universe for you who accept the doctrine of the self-existence 
of objects. The view that objects are not self-existent 
does not touch our theory of the conditioned existence of 
objects.” 1 

But it cannot be that Nagarjuna treated the world as 
unreal and yet believed in no other reality. If all thought is 
falsification, there must be a real that is falsified. For, if 
there be no truth, then falsehood loses its meaning. There 
is no relative knowledge without absolute knowledge being 
immanent in it. There is nothing empirical which does not 
reveal the transcendental. “ O Subhuti, all things have for 
their refuge sunyata, they do not alter that refuge.” 2 3 4 If 
things appear to be independent, such appearance is due to 
maya.3 “ 0 Sariputra, things which do not exist, when they 
are affirmed as existing, are called avidya.” * If we mistake 
the phenomenal world for the noumenal reality, it is a case 
of avidya. But we cannot understand the transcendental 
reality except through the world of experience ; and we cannot 
attain nirvana except through the understanding of the ulti- 
mate reality. 5 

The aim of the Madhyamika Sastra is to teach the nature 
of nirvana, which consists in the annulment of the whole 


1 Bhavatas tu svabhavavadinah, svabhavasya bhavanam vaidhuryat 
sarvabhavapavadah sambhavyate; vayam tu pratltyotpannatvat sarva- 
bhavanam svabhavam evam nopalabhamahe, tat kasyaparadam karisyamah, 
M. Vrtti, viii. There are passages which suggest the theory of absolute 
illusion. In xviii., Nagarjuna compares the things of the world to dream- 
castles in the air and the like : 

Klesah karmani dehaSca phalani ca 
Gandharvanagarakara marlcisvapnasannibhah. 

Candraklrti argues that they are characterless like these and not illusory: 

' gandharvanagarakaradivan nihsvabhava veditavyah.” Candraklrti insists 
that " we are relativists, we are not negativists,” M. Vrtti, 368 . 

* Sunyatagatika hi, subhute, sarvadharmah, te tam gatim na vyati- 
vaitante. 

3 Dharmataisa sarvadharmanam mayadharmatam upadaya. . . . 

4 Yatha, sariputra, na samvidyante tatha samvidyante evam avidyamanas 
tenocyante avidycti. 

J Vyavaharam anasritya paramartho na desyate 

Paramarthan; anagamya nirvanam nadliigainyata iti.— — M.K., xxiv. 

vll. i 23 



700 


INDIAN PHILOSOPHY 


world, and is of the nature of bliss. 1 Nirvana which is the 
non-perception of things is the absolute truth. 2 3 * 5 It is identified 
with sunyata in the celebrated work Sataka. 3 Both nirvana 
and Sunyata are characterised in the same negative way. 
Nirvana is neither existent nor non-existent, but is beyond 
both.4 Sunyata is truth or “ tathata which neither increases 
nor decreases.” 5 In the Astasahasrikdprajiidpdramitd, sun- 
yata is said to be profound. “ The word ‘ profound,’ 0 
Subhuti, is the synonym of that which has no cause, that 
which is beyond contemplation, that which is beyond con- 
ception, that which is not produced, that which is not born 
of non-existence, of resignation, of restraint, of extinction or 
of final journey.” 6 7 For Nagarjuna, nirvana, Buddha, sunyata 
are different names for the same reality. If nirvana is inter- 
preted as the cessation of the world, then it becomes a relative 
notion, something brought about by causes. To assume that 
the world exists before nirvana and becomes non-existent 
after it, is an illogical conception. So Nagarjuna insists that 
there is no real difference between the absolute and the pheno- 
menal, nirvana and samsara. He says: “ Having regard to 
causes or conditions, we call this world a phenomenal one. 
This same world, when causes and conditions are disregarded, 
is called the absolute.” 7 When Nagarjuna describes the ulti- 
mate reality as not created, not liable to destruction, not 
eternal, not passing away, he means that the real is opposed to 
all empirical characters. Fie describes his Sunyata almost in 
the very words in which the nirguna Brahman is charac- 
terised in the Upanisads. 8 It is neither one nor multiple, 


1 Sarvaprapancopasama£ivalaksanam nirvanam gastrasya prayojanam, 
M. Vrtti; see also Mandukya Up., 7 and 12. Cp. CandrakJrti : Bhavathava- 
nturdvayarahitatvat sarvasvabhavanutpattilaksana sunyata. — M. Vrtti, xxiv. 

a Yo’nupalaihbhah sarvadharmanam sa prajeaparamitety ucyate. 

3 Sunyatam eva nirvanam kevalam tad ihobhayam. — M. Vrtti, xviii. 

♦ Na cabhavopi nirvanam kuta evasya bhavata 
BhavabhavaparamarSaksayo nirvapam ucyate, — Bainavali. 

5 M. M. Haraprasad £astri says : “ There is in the midst of all these nega- 
tive descriptions an inconceivable positive which is Sunya” (Journal 0/ the 
Buddhist Text Society, vol. ii., pt. iii, p. vi). 

6 xviii. 

7 M.K., xxv. 9. 

• Kena, 3. 11; Brh., ii. 5. 19; iii. 8-8; Katha, iii. 15; Isa, 9~io; 
Muftdaka, i. 6; Mand., 7. 

* f 



SOME PROBLEMS 


701 


neither existent nor non-existent. 1 $unya, the ultimate 
reality, cannot be comprehended by thought or described by 
words 1 . 

Santideva says that absolute reality does not fall within 
the domain of intellect (buddhi) confined to the realm of 
relativity. The Madhyamika denies that discursive thought 
can establish ultimate truth The learned call sunyata the 
annulment of all conceptions; even those who look upon it a's 
sunyata are said to be incapable of improvement.” 3 “ What 

description or knowledge can be given of an object that cannot 
be described by letters? Even this much — that it does 
not admit of representation by letters — is made by means of 
illusory attribution.” 4 In “ illusory attribution ” we use a 
notion which is the closest approximation to the object studied 
but at once withdraw it since it is inadequate to its content. 5 
To know sunya is to know all; if we do not know it, we know 
nothing. 6 The unique undefinable (anirvacaniya) being is 
said to be the real of all reals (dharmanam dharmata), the 
essential thisness (idamta), suchness (tathata), the suchness of 
all existence (bhutatathata), the very matrix of the lord 
Buddha (tathagatagarbha). It will be very difficult to account 
for Nagajuna’s metaphysics and his insistence on devotion 
(bhakti) if we do not admit the absolutist implications of his 
doctrine of sunya. 7 


1 Nastiko durgatim yati, sugatim yati anastikah 

Yathabhutaparijnanarn moksam advaya nisrita ■ — Ary ar ah: iivali. 
One who holds it to be non-existent attains to misery while one who clots not 
think so attains to happiness; but release is for those who have the true 
knowledge of reality- which is neither existent nor non-existent. 

1 Bodhicaryavatara, ix. 2. 

3 Suny-ata sarvadretinam prokta nihsaranam jinaih 

Yesam tu sunyatadrslis tan asadhyan vabliasire. — M.K., xiii. 

4 Anaksarasya dharmasya srutih ka deSana ca ka 

Sruyate yasya taccapi samaropad anaksara. — M. Vrtti, xv. 

5 See Veduntasata, p. 8 (Jacob’s ed.). 

6 M. K., xxiv.; cf. Brh. Up., ii. 4. 5. 7-9; Hi. 2. 1; iv. 4. 2r; v. 1. r; 
Mund ka, i. 3. 

7 Kudolf Otto says: “ What is true of the strange nothingmss of our 

mystics holds good equally- of the sunyam and the Sunyata. the void and 
emptiness of the Buddhist mystics. The void of the Eastern like the 'nothing ’ 
of the Western mystic is a numinous ideogram of the ‘ wholly other.’ Nothing 
can be said of it since it is ‘ absolutely and intrinsically other than and 
opposite of everything that is and can be thought’ ” (The Idea of the Holy, 
E.T., p. 30). > 



702 


INDIAN PHILOSOPHY 


XII 

Much of the confusion is due to the ambiguous word 
" sunya.” It is applied to the world of experience as well 
as to the ultimate reality. The world of experience, built by 
the relations framed by intellect, is unintelligible. Con- 
sistently Nagarjuna denies that he has any thesis of his own 
to defend, since every intellectual proof would be subject to 
the same weakness. If intellect is incapable of explaining 
experience, since it finds hopeless antinomies there, it cannot 
be expected to be more successful with regard to the ultimate 
reality'. One is as mysterious as the other, and Nagarjuna 
employs the same term “ suny'a ” with reference to both. 
Truth is silence which is neither affirmation nor negation. 
In different senses, both the world of experience and ultimate 
reality defy description as existent or non-existent. If we 
take ultimate reality as true being, the world is not; if we 
take the being of the world as true being, ultimate reality 
is not. Both are sunya though in different senses. 

Towards the end of my discussion of Nagarjuna’s system, 
I suggested certain points of similarity between the Sunyavada 
and the Advaita Vedanta. 1 * 3 * Both of them regard the world 
as subject to change and therefore unreal. 1 * The real, which 
transcends all distinctions of experience and knowledge, is 
admitted by both; 3 only Nagarjuna suggests it, but does not 
work it out in all its fullness, as the Advaita Vedanta does. 
The doctrines of maya and avidy 7 a are taken up and developed 
considerably in the Advaita Vedanta. Virtue and vice are 
regarded in both as means to higher and lower stages in 
samsara, while ultimate release remains entire and unaffected 
by these. 4 In giving a rational, as distinct from scriptural, 


1 Pp. 668-669. 

> Samkara would endorse this passage: 

Jaramaranadharmesu sarvabhavesu sarvada 
Tisthanti katame bha\alj jaramaranam vina. — M K.. vii. 

3 Candraklrti’s statement, sarvakalpanajalarahitajnanajueyanivrittisva- 

bhavam, sivam, paramarthasvabhavam, is true to Samkara’s conception of 

release and reality. See also S.B., iii. 2. 17; B.G., xiii. 12. 

“t Dharme ca satyadharme ca phalam tasya na vidyate, M.K. viii. Cp. 

Brh. Up., iv. 3. 21-22; Katha, ii. 14. « 



SOME PROBLEMS 


708 


foundation for the Advaita Vedanta, Gaudapada finds nothing 
so useful as the Madhyamika theory. Many of his Karikas 
remind us of N agar j una’s work . 1 Not without reason does 
Vacaspati look upon the upholders of Sunyavada as those of 
advanced thought (prakrstamati), while the pluralistic realists 
(Sarvastivadins) are said to be of inferior thought (hlnamati! 
and the Yogacaras of middling (madhyama) ability . 1 

• Cp. Gaudapada’s Kariha, li. 32; iv. 22; iv. 88. 

* Bhamatt, ii. 2. 18. 




NOTES 


CHAPTER I 

Page 27. — God, according to Prasastapada, is the creator of the 
universe. See Paddrthadharmasaiiigraha, p. 48. 

Page 33, n. 1. — Bhamatl, i. 1. 1. 

Page 44.- — For the use of the word “ darsana ” in the sense of 
“ point of view ” or “ philosophic opinion,” see Candraklrti on Nagar- 
j una's Kdrikd (p. 75 of the St. Petersburg edition), and the quotations 
from Bhartrprapanca in the Tikd on Suresvara’s Brhadvarttika, p. S90. 
See also Jacobi, Introduction to vol. 22 of S.B.E., p. xlv. I owe the 
reference to Professor Hiriyanna. 

Page 48. — This view is called Sakhacandranyaya. 

Page 52 . — " It is not too much to say that in no literature is the 
moralising note so prominent. It is perhaps just owing to the univer- 
sality of this mode of expression that there are so few works in Sanskrit 
dealing with morality exclusively ” (Macdonell: Comparative Religion, 
p. 70). 

Page 58. — " Sutra period ” is used here with special reference to the 
philosophical Sutras and not the Vedic or Kalpa Sutras. The period 
of the latter is said to be 500 b.c. to 200 b.c. 

CHAPTER II 

Page 64. — The hymns included in the Rg Veda, it is generally 
held, were composed in the north-west of India. See Macdonell: 
Sanskrit Literature, p. 40. 

Page 66. — Arnold takes as the main criteria of the fivefold division, 
metre, language and vocabulary. 

Page 67. — Regarding the age of the Veda, Professor Winternitz 
sums up the results of his investigations thus : — 

1. Buddhism and Jainism presuppose the whole of the Veda. If, 

as it is probable, the origin of the Jama religion goes back 
to Parsva, the predecessor of Mahavlra, the Veda must 
have been completed and considered as the sacred texts of 
Brahmanism as early as the eighth century b.c. 

2. The hymns of the Rgveda are older than all the rest of Indian 

literature. 

3. The origin and growth of the Rgveda-Samhita requires a long 

time, several centuries. 

4. The Rgveda-Samhita is considerably older than the Atharvaveda- 

Samhita and the Yajurveda-Saiiihita. 

All tlie Sarirhitas are older than the Brahmaqas. 

' 70S 



706 


INDIAN PHILOSOPHY 


6 . Both the Bralimanas and the Upanisads need a long time foi 

their development. 

7. The close relationship between the language of the Vedic 

Samhitas on the one hand and Avesta and Old Persian on 
the other, does not allow us to date the beginning of the 
Vedic period back into a hoary age of many thousands to 
say nothing of millions of years b.c. 

8. On the other hand, the facts of political, religious and literary 

history require a period of at least a thousand years and 
probably more between the earliest hymns of the Rgveda and 
the latest parts of the old Upanisads and the rise of Buddhism, 

9. It is not possible to give any definite date for the beginning of 

Vedic poetry. We do not know more for certain than that 
Vedic literature began at some unknown time in the past and 
extended up to the eighth century. 

10. But it is more probable that this unknown time of the begin- 
ning of the Vedic literature was nearer 2500 or 2000 B.C. 
than to 1500 or 1200 b.c. 

[Calcutta Review, November 1923.) 

The recent finds at Harappa in the Punjab and Mohenjo Daro in 
Sind throw additional light on the antiquity of the Indian civilisation, 
We have now definite archaeological evidence to show that 5000 years 
ago, the peoples of Sind and the Punjab were living in well-built cities 
and had a relatively developed civilisation with a high standard of art 
and craftsmanship and a developed system of writing. The Punjab 
and Sind antiquities include “ houses and temples massively built of 
burnt brick and provided with well-constructed water conduits covered 
by marble slabs." Besides a variety of potteries, both painted and 
plain, some fashioned by the hand and some turned on the wheel, 
toys and bangles of blue glass, paste and shell, we have a number of 
engraved and inscribed seals bearing inscriptions in a hitherto unknown 
pictographic script. Sir John Marshall, the Director-General of 
Archaeology', writes that these discoveries “ have established once for 
all the existence on Indian soil in the third millennium B.c. of a civili- 
sation as highly developed and seemingly as widespread as the Sumerian 
culture of Mesopotamia, with conclusive evidence of a close contact 
between the two.” Though it is too soon to say anything definite 
about the connection of India and Mesopotamia in the third millennium 
B.c., these finds may perhaps furnish some clue to the Dravidian 
problem. 

Page 'll. — -The word “ deva ” is connected with the Latin dens 
and is referred to a root meaning “ to shine." The Nirukta definition 
is late. 

Pages 73-4. — Yaska states in his Nirukta that many' of the Vedic 
mantras admit of adhibhautika (physical), adhidaivika (religious) and 
adhyatmika (spiritual) interpretations. Agni, for example, signifies 
fire on the physical plane, the priest god on the religious, and the great 



NOTES 


707 


effulgence of God on the spiritual plane. When the natural forces 
were addressed, the devotee had in mind the underlying power and 
not the physical fact. 

Page 75, n. i. — The language spoken in the early Vedic period was a 
prior stage of what in a later age and probably in a different locality 
became Sanskrit (classical). 

Page 78. — Rta is a conception that goes back to the Indo-Iranian 
period. 

Page 85. — Indra was already known in the Indo-Iranian period. 
See Keith: The Religion and Philosophy of the Veda, vol. i, p. 133. 

Page 89. — In the hymn to Vak (x. 125), we find the conception of 
an immanent word, a force which dwells and operates in all things 
and in which unconsciously all men have their being. 

Page 99. — In the R.V., where the interest is mainly cosmological, 
“ sat ’’ means the world of objects or experience and “ asat ” refers 
to the non-being or the primitive undifferentiated condition of things, 
which is the antecedent of the present world-order; cp. also Tait. Up., 
ii. 7, where “ sat ” or the world of name and form is said to be born 
of “ asat ” or non-being. 

Page 102. — In the Orphic cosmogony, the idea is found that in the 
beginning was the primeval water, from it arose an egg, and out of 
this proceeded the first creature, the god Phanes. See Nilsson: A 
History of Greek Religion, p. 73. 

Page 107. — The ideas of ista (or what is given in sacrifice) and purta 
(or what is given as presents to the priests) (R.V., x. 14. 8) contain 
the germs of later ceremonialism. Istapurta is said to have a distinct 
substantial being with which we get united after death. It stands 
for the merit or demerit which we earn by our pious activities. The 
doctrine of karma is much influenced by this idea. 

Page 109. — Cp. Bloomfield: “ We have in connection with the rta 
a pretty complete system of ethics, a kind of ‘ counsel of perfection ’ ” 
[The Religion of the Veda, p. 126). 

The sense of sin is not absent from the R.V.; cp. “ Loosen the 
bonds, O Varuna, that hold me, loosen the bonds, above, between 
and under.” 

“ So in thy holy law may we, made sinless, belong to Aditi, O 
thou Aditya ” (R.V., i. 24. 15; see also i. 31. 16; iv. 54. 3). 

Page no. — Cp. "Thornless is the path for him who seeks the 
law ” (R.V., i. 41). " To him who keeps the law, whether old or 

young, thou givest happiness and energy that he may live well ” 
(R.V., i. 91). See also R.V., iii. 59. 2. 


CHAPTER III 

Page 128, n. 1. — Strictly the root “ vid ” means " to know.” 

Page 131. — The older Vedic idea of rta relating to the order of the 
physical and the moral spheres becomes definitely transformed in the 



708 


INDIAN PHILOSOPHY 


Brahmanas into the concept of dharma which refers specially to the 
moral order of the world. It includes all those spheres which were 
later discriminated into ritual, code, law, custom and etiquette. Some- 
times “ dharma ” appears as a god. See Sat. Brah., xiii. 4. 3. 14. 

Page 136. — See Keith: Aitareya Brahmana. 


CHAPTER IV 

Page 145. — Though we have spasmodic suggestions of the interest 
in the subject in earlier literature (see Atharva Veda, xviii. 44), it 
becomes dominant in the Upanisads. 

Page 165.- — Manas is bound to prana. Cp. Prana-bandhanam hi 
saumya manah. 

Page 168. — Samkara takes “ anandamaya ” to be the jiva. 

Page 169. — The immanent conception of God also is found in the 
R.V. (see the hymn addressed to Aditi, i. 89. 10), but it becomes 
emphasised in the Upanisads. 

Page 188 n. — Kama and rupa mean “ name ” and “ corporeal 
form” in the Upanisads. See Brh. Up., i. 6. 1-2; Mundaka Up., 
vi. 8; also Oldenberg’s Buddha, pp. 445 ff. 

Page 222 . — Deussen thinks that in the earlier Upanisads only the 
three stages of the student, the householder and the anchonte are 
recognised, while tho.^e who know the truth are exalted above the 
aSramas. See Philosophy of the Upanisads, p. 368. Jdbala Up. 
mentions the four asramas. See Brh. Up., iv. 4. 10 and 22; Chan. Up., 
ii. 23. 1 ; v. 10. 

Page 223, — “ There is current a rather ill-considered modern theory 
to the effect that the philosophers were not of the priestly caste but 
of the warrior caste, perhaps of non-indigenous origin; that even 
Buddha may have been of a foreign race. But there is little to support 
this theory and much that goes to disprove it. The germs of the 
philosophy of the Upanisads lie buried in the (priestly) Atharva-Veda 
and Brahmanas, and it is from them that we have to derive the un- 
systematic philosophic utterances of the later sages in whose debates, 
however, the Rajas of the day probably took the condescending interest 
customary to cultured royalty and in which, when they took part, they 
were credited with victory ” (Hopkins: Ethics of India). 

Page 229, n. 2. — Svayam eva raj ate. Then it means he is self- 
luminous or self-dependent. 

Page 234. — Dhatuprasada is the expression used. Kafha Up., 
ii. 20. 

Page 241. — The term jivanmukta is a later one, though the idea is 
contained in the Upanisads. Cp., e.g., Katha Up., vi. 14. 

Page 267. — See also Belvalkar and Ranade: History of Indian 
Philosophy, vol. ii; Keith: The Religion and Philosophy of the Veda, 
2 vols.; and Ranade: A Constructive Survey of Upanisadic Philosophy. 



NOTES 


709 


CHAPTER V 

Page 274. — Sanjaya’s scepticism influenced considerably Buddha’s 
attitude to metaphysics and the Jaina view of Saptabhahgi. Cp. 
“ If you ask me whether there is another world (atthi paraloko) — 
well, if I thought there were, I would say so. And I do not think it 
is thus or thus. And I do not think it is otherwise. And I do not 
deny it ” ( Sacred Books of the Buddhists, vol. ii, p. 75). 

Page 278. — Bhaskara, in his commentary on Brahma Sutra (iii. 3. 53), 
refers to the Sutra of Brhaspati. 

Page 279.- — If Carvaka is a proper name, it may be the name of a 
pupil of Brhaspati. It is often regarded as a common name. See 
Macdonell: Sanskrit Literature, p. 450. 

Page 283. — Materialism is ranked with the Samkhya and the Yoga 
in the Arthasastra. See i. 2. 


CHAPTER VI 

Page 288. — It is sometimes said that the Jains have ten Niryuktas 
as well as a number of Bhasyas. 

Page 294. — Inductive truths are derived from anupapatti or 
the impossibility of conceiving the opposite. See Pramcyahamala- 
martanda, pp. 40, 50, 100-1. 

Page 295. — The validity of knowledge consists in the faithful 
representation of objects, while it is tested by practical efficiency. 

Page 297. — " Although all these (five stages) are in a way the 
same, they have different designations in virtue of being special phases. 
In some cases the succession is unobserved by reason of rapid 
origination ” ( Pramdi}anayatatlvdlokdlamkdra , ii). 


CHAPTER VII 

Page 342. — Cp. K. J. Saunders: “ The great keynotes of our modern 
scientific thinking, causality and the unity of the universe, even if 
Gautama did not first formulate them, were popularised by him ” 
[Epochs in Buddhist History, p. ix). 

Page 343. — The Tipitaka contains products of different ages. 
Whether or not the Canon of the Dharma and the Vinaya as found 
to-day were composed at the first Council, it is clear that the elders 
of the faith gathered together soon after the demise of Buddha and 
discussed questions of doctrine and discipline. We are on more certain 
ground with regard to the second Council at Vesali, dated a hundred 
years after the death of Buddha, which was aimed specifically at the 
repudiation of the ten errors wdiich crept into the doctrine in the 
meantime. It ,may well be that the Canon w'as actually drawn up at 



710 


INDIAN PHILOSOPHY 


the third Council of Pataliputra, presided over by Tissa, which met 
during Asoka’s time, and by then different sects developed on the 
basis of the master’s teaching. ASoka’s edicts protest against the 
schismatic tendencies of his age. The Ceylonese tradition relates that 
the Canon composed at the third Council was carried to Ceylon by 
Mahinda, the pupil of Tissa and the younger brother or the son of 
Asoka (according to another tradition), and committed to record under 
Vattagamani. See Keith: Buddhist Philosophy, pp. 3, 13-32. 

Page 344. — Professor Keith thinks that the Abhidhamma Pitaka is 
the work of Vibhajyavadins. See Buddhist Philosophy, pp. 152-3. 

Page 346. — Buddhaghosa wrote a commentary on the Dlgha Nikaya 
called Sumangalavildsini. 

Page 353. — See Silacara: Discourses of Gotarna, the Buddha, vol. ii, 
xxxv and xxxvi. 

Page 353, n. 1. — See Culasaccaka Sutta, M.N. (35), i. 237, 

Page 354. — We read from the Jatakas of cow sacrifices (i. 144) and 
even human sacrifices (iii. 314). 

Page 356. — The Jatakas refer frequently to the degeneration of the 
Brahmin and his eagerness for money. In i. 77, the king’s chaplain 
persuades a young Brahmin, who is opposed to the sacrifice, in these 
words: “ My son, this means money to us, a great deal of money.” 
Similarly, when the disciple of the royal priest protests against animal 
sacrifices, he is told: "We shall have abundance of dainties to eat; 
only hold your peace” (iii. 314). The jackal in the Srigala Jdlaka 
says, " The Brahmins are full of greed for wealth” (i. 142; see also 
iv. 496). 

Page 360, n. 1. — M.N., i. 265. 

Page 362. — Cp. the four truths of Buddhism with the division of 
medical topics into disease, origin of disease, health and healing. 
Y.B., ii. 15. 

Page 370.- — Though the idea of orderly development is contained 
in the Upanisads (see Katha), the Buddhist formula of causality 
emphasises it. 

Later Buddhist texts make the important distinction between 
causes generally (paccaya) and the cause proper (hetu), which is the 
real producer of the result, the other causes being conditions, coeffi- 
cients or auxiliaries. The Patthana classifies conditions under twenty- 
four heads. The power of one idea to affect another is called, in later 
Buddhism, satti or ability. 

Page 371, n. — See A.N., i. 286; S.N., ii. 25; D.N., ii. 198. 

Page 373. — Mahdvagga, i. 21; S.N., i. 133; iv. 157 and 399. It 
is difficult to say definitely when the theory of momentariness (ksani- 
kavada) was formulated. Kathdvattu (viii. 8) seems to be familiar 
with it. Ekacitta ksanikd sabbe dhamma. All things are momentary 
like mental states. Disappearance is the very essence of existence. 
Whatever exists perishes at the next moment. Everything comes 
out of nothing and vanishes into nothing. Nyayabindutika, p. 68; 
see also Ratnakirti’s Ksanabhahgasiddhi. ( 


1 



NOTES 


711 


Page 374. — On the view of momentariness, causation is neither the 
evolution of the cause into the effect, nor the creation by the cause 
of an effect different from itself, but is the necessary succession of 
determined effects. No real causality can be attributed to the strictly 
momentary. 

Kathavattu (xvii. 3; xxi. 7 and 8) seems to admit the possibility 
of acts without fruits. See also xii. 2; xvii. 1. In Milinda, the 
arhat is said to suffer pain over which he has no mastery (pp. 134 ff.). 
It expressly asserts chance (animitta); pp. i 3 o ff. 

Page 376, n. 1. — Proceedings of the Aristotelian Society, 1919, p. 236. 

Page 380. — The doctrine of pratityasamutpada or the formula of 
causation, which has for its first member avidya (ignorance), lends 
support to the subjective view of the world. 

Page 381. — The doctrine of perception suggested in the early 
literature ( Majjhima N., iii. 242) supports a realistic view of the world. 

The Abhidhamma regards the four elements as underived matter 
and makes ether (akaia) a derived one ( Dhanimasahgani , M.N., i. 423, 
ii. 17). We find sometimes mention of six real elements where space 
and consciousness are added to the ordinary four elements (see 
Itivuttaka, 44, 51 and 73). 

Page 382, n. 1. — M.N., i. 426. 

Page 384, n. 1. — See also Mahaniddna Sutta, D.N., ii. 66; M.N., i. 
138, 300; S.N., iii. 66, iv. 34. 

Page 385. — In the Alagaddupama Sutta (M.N., i. 140), Buddha 
repudiates the pantheistic view which identifies the self with the world. 

Page 386. — For the dialogue of Vacchagotta, see Aggivacchagotta 
Sutta, M.N., 72; i. 484-489. See Dahlke: Buddhism and its Place in 
the Mental Life of Mankind, pp. 37 ff. 

Page 387. — The Vajjiputtakas adopt the view of pudgala or person 
over and above the impermanent factors of empiric individuality. 
They maintain that the person, though implicated in the elements of 
empiric individuality, is quite distinct from them, even as fire is neither 
the same as nor different from the burning stick, but is something mure 
than the stick. M. Poussin writes: “ I cannot help thinking that 
the pudgalavada is more in harmony with the duhkhasatya and the 
law of karman than the nairatmyavada ” (J.R.A.S., 1901, p. 308). 
Vasubandhu, the Sautrantika, objects to the view of an uncaused, 
eternal, changeless self, inactive and inefficient. 

Mrs. Rhys Davids summarises her views on this question thus: 
(1) So far as we can trace it, the earliest teaching we call Buddhist 
did not deny the very man, or self. To see this, we must shed our own 
standpoint of the eighteenth century in force still with us; we must 
imagine the power of the word atman, attan for an educated Indian 
of the seventh century b.c., when invited by a religious teacher that 
he would do well to ‘ seek the attan.' Almost it was tantamount to 
bidding him ‘ seek God,' or, ‘ seek the Holy Spirit within yourselves.' 
This is said to have been one of the earliest addresses of the founder 
of Buddhism. Vinaya, i. 23 (Mahavagga, 1. 14); Buddhist Psychology, 



712 


INDIAN PHILOSOPHY 


pp. 28 ff. It is historically of deep significance. And it is supported 
by many passages in the four chief books ( Nikayas ) and the Dhamma - 
pada, where the subject is man’s communing with and knowing 
himself — ways, too, of wording which are not maintained in later 
teaching. 

“What was denied from the very first was that man, the spirit, the 
attan, could rightly be considered as either body or mind. Were he 
either or both, then as being things so weak and transient as either of 
these, he could not will-to-become (as will he did) ; he could not be 
chooser of his destiny. This is not to deny that the ‘ man-in-man ’ 
is. It is to say: ‘ Form not so wrong a notion of what you really are.’ 
But to have said, at that day in India, ‘ You are neither the one nor 
the other, therefore you are not at all, you, that is, are just only a 
hundle of both,’ would have made the new gospel an absurdity, an 
insult on the intelligence of the hearer. 

“ (2) Yet even now the Southern Buddhist in Asia and the very 
latest writers on Buddhism in the West fail to discern the change 
which spread like a very canker over Buddhism in this matter. 

“ (3) Is there none who wall vindicate this helper of men, noble 
and wise? Is there none who will understand that he who brings 
the new message, which we call a religion, to men is one who, whatever 
he did teach, did not teach certain things because he simply could 
not, being who he was, so teach. If we have what I have put forward 
above as a right perspective in contemplating the relation: Mandater 
of gospel; the mandate or gospel; the mandated (viewed as the two 
terms of the relation and the bond between them), then shall we be 
sure that the mandater, in appealing to the very ‘ man-in-man,’ could 
not tell the mandated that this ‘ he ’ was not real, was non-existent. 
We shall be sure that he W'ould, on the contrary, strengthen man’s 
belief in his reality by enlarging man’s knowledge about himself. No 
less sure shall we be, that the mandater could not, in so enlarging 
man’s knowledge, and thereby bringing about a new becoming, a 
fresh change in man, tell the mandated that there was, in man, that 
which was unchangeable.” — Calcutta Review, November 1927. 

Page 387, n. 1. — M.N., i. 256. 

Page 399, «. 3. — See D.N., ii. 62. 

Page 403.— According to M.N., i. 190, three factors are involved 
in perception, objects, senses and the acts of attention. 

Page 404.- — In the Dhammasangani, citta includes the five forms of 
tense cognition, activity of mind and representative cognition, while 
jetasika covers the other three aggregates of feelings, perceptions and 
dispositions. 

Page 406. — Buddhaghosa regards perception (samjna), intelligence 
(vijnana) and intuition (prajiia) as successive steps in a staircase 
comparable to the different reactions provoked by the sight of precious 
metals in a child who sees in them coloured objects, in a citizen who 
recognises their exchange value, and in an expert who knows all about 
their origin and development. See Buddhaghosa on M.N., i. 292. 



NOTES 


718 


We have no systematic account of the emotions in the Buddhist 
Canon. Lobha or attraction or appetite, dosa or aversion, and moha 
or delusion are mentioned along with their opposites of alobha, adosa, 
and amoha, disinterestedness, amity and right knowledge. Feelings 
of friendship or love (metta), sympathy with suffering (karuna) and 
sympathy with happiness or joy (mudita) are also mentioned. The 
idea of continuity (samtati) is found in the Abhidhamma ( Dhamma - 
sahgani, 585, 643, 734; Kathavatlu, x. 1; xi. 6 and xxi. 4; Abhidham- 
mattasangaha, v. 12, 15 and 16). Experiences of objects leave behind 
their seeds or impressions in the consciousness-continuum, and in the 
fulness of time the seed ripens and rises into consciousness and we have 
recognition. This consciousness-series reaches its end only at libera- 
tion. This view of continuity is developed by the Sautrantikas, who 
regard the person as equivalent to cittasarirtana. 

Page 409.- — Though rebirth is new birth, there is, however, con- 
tinuity between the consciousness which appears at birth and the 
consciousness at the time of death ( Milinda , p. 47). This is why it is 
often urged that the last thought at the time of death has an essential 
influence on the form of rebirth. 

Page 410. — The individual carries with him at every moment his 
future ( Milinda , p. 101). Each moment of our life is charged with 
the satti or the force of the past, and the present impresses itself on 
all that follows, perfuming it, as it were, as the term vasana indicates. 

Page 411. — The first moment of the new life is called vijiiana, but 
it is the third member on the list. Its antecedents are the good and 
the bad dispositions sticking to it from the beginning. They are called 
samskaras or prenatal forces. Avidya, the first member, represents 
the defiling character of ignorance. 

Page 411, n. 1. — S.N., ii. 10. 

Page 411, n. 3.— V. 388; A.N., i. 177. 

Page 414.— While consciousness is said to pass from life to death, 
we are not sure whether it is visible in itself or is accompanied by a 
subtle body. 

Page 414, n, 1. — D.N., ii. 63. 

Page 415.— For the different views about the chain of causation, 
see Keith: Badd. Phil., pp. 105-111. 

Page 417, n. 1. — Dhammapada , 60. 

Page 421. — See PSilacdra: Discourses op Gotama, the Buddha, vol. i, 

p. 41. 

Page 422. — Milinda (pp. 95, 117} refers to the doctrine that a man 
may transfer his merit to another instead of keeping it to himself. 

Page 423. — Intuition is intimately related to intelligence. See 
Majjhima N., i. 292 ff. 

Page 432, n. 4. — D.N., i. 124. 

Page 438. — “ There is nothing to show that Buddha tried to 
abolish caste as a social institution. There was no reason why he 
should do so in so far as his teaching could be enforced that the true 
Brahmin was tl^e virtuous brahmin. And within the order, caste did 



714 


INDIAN PHILOSOPHY 


disappear, and there are many instances of low-caste persons being 
admitted as monks ” (E. J. Thomas: The Life of Buddha, 128; see 
also Uddna, v. 5). One of Buddha’s early disciples is a barber who 
later became a leader in the Order. In the Aggaiiha Suttanta (D.N., 
iii. 80 ff.), the claims of the Brahmins to pre-eminence on the ground 
of birth are contemptuously set aside. 

Page 440.— We, however, come across statements, though they are 
very few, that accidental happenings which do not apparently conform 
to the law of karma are possible. Kathavattu, xvii. 3; xvi. 8; Milinda, 
pp. 135 ff., 180. These are really exceptions which prove the rule. 

See Majjhima N ., ii. 104. 

Page 443. — Early Buddhism admits the reality of invisible world 
systems each containing three regions or worlds, those of desire (kama), 
of material form (rupa) and the formless ones (arupa). The first are 
the abodes of ghosts (pretas), of demons (asuras), of men and of gods. 
The second includes the brahmalokas, sixteen in number, distinguished 
according to the gods freed from desires, who abide there. Those who 
practice the four meditations and are freed from rebirth remain there 
until they attain nirvana. The world without form is the dwelling of 
those who carry out the formless meditations. 

Page 446. — The Vaibhasikas accept this intermediate state with a 
quasi-material transporting (ativahika) body. 

Page 447. — The beautiful poetry of the Thera and the Then gathas 
is inspired by ideas of the happiness of nirvana, which is capable of 
attainment even in this life (see Dtgha N., i. 84). 

Page 448. — For Nagasena there is temporal experience for the 
individuals who are reborn; for those freed from samsara there is no 
temporal experience. Time belongs to the stuff of worldly life (see 
Milinda, pp. 50 ff.). 

Page 449. — See M.N., i. 487; S.N., iv. 347; iii. 109. Cp. also 
Patisambhiddmagga , i. 143-5. 

Page 450.' — According to Milinda (p. 271), space and nirvana last 
independently of all forms of causation. 

Page 452. — See M.Y. (63), i. 427-432. 

Page 453 n. — Alagaddtipama Suita, M.N., i. 140— 1. 

Page 455.- — In the cosmic evolution, men of great merit secure the 
rank of gods. Even the appearance of Brahma with the delusion 
that he is self-created (svayambhu) is in accordance with this principle. 

Page 456 n. — See Lakshminarasu : Essence of Buddhism, pp. 261-2, 
275 ~ 6 - 

Page 465. — See Pratt: The Pilgrimage of Buddhism, chap. v. 

Page 472. — The Samkhya conception of the constant process of 
nature is analogous to the Buddhist conception of the world as a 
perpetual becoming. In both, the law of causality governs the process. 
The stress on avidya as the cause of all misery is common to the two 
systems. 

Page 473. — The ideas of the Yoga system had a powerful hold on 
early Buddhism. Alarakalama and Udduka, two teachers of Buddha, 



NOTES 


715 


were adepts in the practice of Yoga. It is quite possible and very- 
probable that Buddha borrowed his ideas of the discipline of mind 
from the Yoga system, as the use of the words citta (thought), nirodha 
(suppression) suggests. The Yoga makes ignorance the cause of 
misery and regards it as a klesa or defilement which is at the root of 
all others. The four stages of samadhi or concentration may have 
been the original of the Buddhist view of the four ordinary meditations 
(Y.S.T., 17). The four brahmaviharas of friendship, sympathy with 
sorrow, sympathy with happiness and indifference have also their 
parallel in the Yoga system (Y.S.I., 33). It is not difficult to trace 
the chain of causation to the Yoga philosophy (iv. 11). See also 
Stcherbatsky: The Conception of Buddhist Nirvana, pp. 2 ff. 

Page 476. — See also Keith: Buddhist Philosophy. 


CHAPTER VIII 

Page 480. — The conception of “ trimurti ” is often regarded as of 
a much later date. See Hopkins: The Great Epic, pp. 46, 184. We 
can trace it, however, to the Maitri Up., iv and v, though the part of 
the Upanisad in which it occurs is regarded as a late addition. 

Page 483. — The passage in which Buddha is mentioned in the 
Rdmdyana is said to be an interpolation. 

Page 490. — In the first two stages of the development of the Epic, 
Visnu with his Vedic ancestry, Narayana, the cosmic god controlling 
the whole evolution of the universe, Vasudeva, the saviour god, and 
Krsna, the friend and comforter, meet and coalesce. See Santi P., 
341. 20-6. 342. 129. 

Page 492, n. 2. — “ Apo nara iti prokta apo vai narasunavah 
ayanam tasyatah purvam tena narayana smrtah.” 

Page 496. — Dr. Jha quotes an ingenious suggestion that “ the 
system (pancaratra) is so called by reason of the fact that it was 
promulgated for the purpose of meeting the religious cravings of men 
during the five days the Vedas remained with the demon from whom 
they were rescued by Visnu before the recreation of the world after 
pralaya ” ( Hindustan Review, January 1924, p. 219). 

Page 504, n. 5. — Caksuh pasyati rupani manasa na caksusa. 

Page 505, n. 3. — Duhkhad udvijate sarvas sarvasya sukham ipsitam. 

Page 308, n. 10. — 

Papam karma krtam kincid yadi tasmin na dffiyate, 

Nrpate tasya putresu pautresvapi ca naptrsu. 

Page 511. — Time and nature are not peculiarly Buddhistic. They 
belong to the early naturalistic speculations as well. See Atharua 
Veda, xix. 53, where time is deified. 



716 


INDIAN PHILOSOPHY 


CHAPTER IX 

Page 531 n. — Anandagiri, who refers to a Vrttikara twice in his 
Tikd, S.B.G. (pp. 6 and 27 of the Anandairama ed.), does not identify 
him with Bodhayana. 

Page 538 n. — See also R.V., x. 129. 

Page 542. — Lalane tadane matur nakarunyam yatha’rbhake 
Tadvad eva mahesasya niyantur gunadosayoh. 

Page 544. — Bhdgavata, i. 3. 2. 8. 

Page 555 n. — Bradley: Appearance and Reality, pp. 5-6. 

Page 565 . — “ The worship of the Blessed One does not express 
itself in mere ecstasy. In it the whole of one’s being is engaged. 
' He is of right purpose.’ In this rightness of purpose there is the 
guarantee of righteousness in deed ” (McKenzie: Hindu Ethics, p. 131). 

Page 569. — Cp. Nivrttir api mudhasya pravrttir upajayate 
Pravrttir api dhirasya nivrtti-phalabhagin!. 

Page 572. — See M.B., iardi P., 320. 36 and 38. 

Page 576. — See B.G., v. 23-5. 


CHAPTER X 

Page 590. — In the Mahayana, Buddha loses his human character 
and is endowed with superhuman powers. The Jatakas of the Hinayana 
give place to the Avadanas or the glorious achievements of Buddha 
and his followers. 

Page 592. — In the Mahaydnasamparigrahasastra, Asanga enumerates 
seven points in which the Mahayana may be regarded as superior to 
the Sravakayana. “ The Mahayana is comprehensive; whatever has 
been taught by Buddha, not by Sakyamuni in one life alone, is 
accepted; nay, more, as we have seen, whatever is well said, is to be 
deemed the word of a Buddha. Secondly, the Mahayana aims at 
general salvation, not at individual release, thus excelling in love for 
all created things. Thirdly, the Mahayana is intellectually wider in 
range than the Hinayana; the latter denies the reality of the self, 
the former goes so far as to deny all phenomenal reality whatever. 
Fourthly, the Mahayana inculcates spiritual energy; to seek swift 
release for oneself is not its aim as it is that of the Sravaka. Fifthly, 
the Mahayana is skilled in the manifold means (upaya) to lead men to 
salvation; it is unwearied in their varied application. Moreover, it 
leads to a far higher ideal ; the adept aims to become not a mere saint 
but a Buddha in his complete perfection. Lastly, when an adept 
becomes a Buddha, he has the infinite power of manifesting himself 
throughout the universe in a body of bliss.” See Suzuki: Mahayana 
Buddhism, ch. ii. 

Page 594. — Vasubandhu says that the transitoriness of existence and 
the eternity of nirvana are both implied by the reality of the absolute. 


t 



NOTES 


717 


Page 597. — In the Hinayana, the physical body of the Buddha is 
distinguished from the body of the law which each man has to realise 
for himself. Later in the Dwydiuddna (pp. 19 £f.; see Dlgha N., iii. 
84), we find the idea that the material body of the Buddha is the body, 
while his soul is the law. The true nature or soul of Buddha is the 
intuition (prajiia) or enlightenment (bodhi) attained by him. When 
expressed in metaphysical terms, it is the ultimate reality which 
underlies the phenomenal universe. While this reality belongs to 
every Buddha, each Buddha is said to have at the same time a dharma 
kaya of his own. The dharmakaya is identified with the tathata, or 
primitive undifferentiated reality, or the womb of the Tathagata, or 
the source of every individual being ( Lamkavatdra , p. 80). Each 
Buddha is conceived as possessing a body of ineffable brilliance which 
is called sambhogakaya. The relation of sambhogakaya to dharmakaya 
is explained by Candrakirti ( Madhyamakavatara , iii. 12). Those 
equipped with wisdom (jnana), as the Buddhas, reach dharmakaya, 
while those equipped with merit (punya), as the Bod’nisattvas, reach 
sambhogakaya. One cannot, however, be sure of this, since the 
Mahayana literature gives visible forms to Amitabha and Sakyamuni. 

Page 597 n. — See Sutralariikara, ix. 77, and Karaydavyuha. There 
is no absolute being possible even for a Buddha. 

Page 598. — " Those who worship the Bodbisattvas and read the 
Mahayana Sutras are called the Mahayamsts ( I-Tsing : Takakusu’s 
E.T., p. 14). 

The conception of law as the body of the Buddha is suggested in 
the Canon. The Sautrantikas seem to accept a body of bliss, one of 
the three kayas. 

Page 599. — The conception of the absolute realising itself in Buddhas 
and Bodhisattvas is of great religious value. It shows how the absolute 
is co-operating with the individual to secure for him the bliss of 
deliverance. 

Page 600. — The radiant vijnana transforms itself into active 
intellect and develops into the world of matter and consciousness. 

Page 601. — See also Mahavastu. 

Page 602.- — The Bodhisattva, out of compassion, is prepared to face 
the tortures of hell [Bodhicaryavatdra, vi. 120; Siksasamuccaya, p. 167). 
The sufferings of the Bodhisattvas are not the penalties of past crimes, 
but opportunities for the exercise of their perfections ( Bodhicaryavatdra , 
vi. 106). To the Bodhisattvas we owe homage and adoration. By 
confessing our sins to them we merit their forgiveness (ibid., vi. 119. 
122. 124; cp. also Siksdsamuccaya, pp. 160 ff .). By the transfer of 
one’s merit, one can please the Bodhisattvas ( Bodhicaryavatdra , v. 85 ; 
Siksdsamuccaya, p. 127). Santideva is alive to the folly of the man 
who hands over his body to the wild beasts for food, when he could 
confer on others the precious gift of the knowledge of the true faith 
{Siksdsamuccaya, pp. 119 and 34 ff.; Bodhicaryavatdra, v. 86 ff.; 
Bodhisattvabhumi, i. ix). There is no disgust with life. The rigours 
of monasticism are relaxed, and the householder is regarded as being 



718 


INDIAN PHILOSOPHY 


in a favourable position for the attainment of Buddhahood. See 
Suzuki: Mahay ana Buddhism, chap. xii. 

Page 603. — We cannot say how enlightenment arises. “ The 
ancient alone knoweth the incomprehensible faith of action in that he 
doth lead to release men, even when they have abandoned thought 
of enlightenment ” (Bodhicarydvatara, iv. 27). 

Page 604, n. 3. — Ragadvesamohaksayat parinirvanam. 

Page 605 . — Vimalakirti Sutra gives a positive account of nirvana. 
It admits the possibility of the growth of insight in the midst of life 
with all its distractions. Nirvana is samsara, and we must try to 
attain nirvana in and through life and not through abstention from 
its activities. According to Asariga’s Mahay anasamparigrahasastra, 
the Buddha, though free from attachment and defilement, is yet full 
of compassion for the departed souls who are to be rescued by him. 

Page 610.' — See also K. J. Saunders: Epochs in Buddhist History, 
Sir Charles Eliot: Hinduism and Buddhism ; J. B. Pratt: The 

Pilgrimage of Buddhism. 


CHAPTER XI 

Page 61 1 n . — See Atoka’s Bhabru edict and Divydvaddna, p. 272. 
In Anguttara N. (iv. 163), Buddha is compared to a granary whence 
men bring every good word. See Vincent Smith: Asoka, p. 154. 

Page 613. — On Sarvastivada or the view that everything exists, 
see Stcherbatsky’s The Central Conception of Buddhism. Sarvastivada 
was an ancient school of Buddhism of which the Vaibhasika system 
is a continuation. 

Page 613 n . — Dhamatrata is the author of Udanavarga and Samyu- 
ktdbhidharmahrdayasastra. M. M. Haraprasad Sastri says that “ Arya- 
deva hails from Kanci ” (Indian Historical Quarterly, 1925, p. 111). 

Page 615. — The self or living being is not an ultimate fact, while 
the real elements (dharmas) are. Nairatmya or soullessness is the 
negative way of expressing the existence of ultimate reality (dharmata) ; 
only what we call the soul is not that. Cp. Yatomitra on Abhidharma- 
kola, ix. Pravacanadharmata punar atra nairatmyam buddhanusasanl 
va. Stcherbatsky says: “ Buddhism never denied the existence of a 
personality or a soul, in the empirical sense; it only maintained that 
it was no ultimate reality (not a dharma) ” (see The Central Con- 
ception of Buddhism, pp. 25-26). 

" The elements had four salient feaures: (1) they were not sub- 

stance — this refers to all the seventy-five elements, whether eternal 
or impermanent; (2) they had no duration — this refers only to the 
seventy-two impermanent elements of phenomenal existence ; (3) they 
were unrest — this refers only to one part of the latter class, that which 
roughly corresponds to the ordinary man as opposed to the purified 
condition of the elements of a saint (arya) ; (4) and their unrest had 
its end in final deliverance. Speaking technically: (1) all dharmas 

are anatman, (2) all samskrta dharmas are anitya, (3) all sasruva 



NOTES 


719 


dharmas are duhkha, and (4) their nirvana alone is £anta. An element 
is non-substantial, it is evanescent, it is in a beginningless state of 
commotion, and its final suppression is the only balm.” 

Regarding the relation of the permanent elements to their mani- 
festations, the Vibhasa seems to suggest four different views. Dharma- 
trata maintains unity of substance (dravya) along with change in 
existence (bhava). The essence remains unchanged while the existence 
alters as when milk changes into curds. This view seems to be 
influenced by the Samkhya theory. Ghosa assumes that elements, 
though existent in the past, present and future, change their aspect 
(laksana) at different times. This view is not generally accepted, as it 
implies the co-existence of the different aspects at the same time. 
Buddhadeva thinks that the past, the present and the future are 
contingent on one another, and the same entity may be described as 
past, present or future in accordance with its relation to the preceding 
or succeeding moment, even as a woman may be regarded as mother, 
wife or daughter. This view does not find acceptance, as it is said to 
involve a confusion of the three periods of time. Vasumitra advocates 
a change of condition (avastha), i.e. of efficiency in the present and 
non-efficiency in the past and the future. When an entity has per- 
formed its function and has ceased to act, it is past; when it is pro- 
ducing it, it is present; when it has not yet produced it, it is future. 
There is real existence in all the three states. The past is real, for 
were it not so, it could not be the object of knowledge, nor could it 
determine the present. The Vaibhasikas generally accept the view 
of- Vasumitra. The Vibhajyavadins adopt the view that the present 
elements and those among the past which have not yet produced their 
function are existent, while the future elements and those of the past 
which have produced their function are non-existent. See Stcher- 
batsky: The Central Conception of Buddhism, p. 46, and Appendix 1; 
Keith: Budd. Phil., pp. 104-5. 

Page 616. — The Sarvastivada holds that there are fourteen kinds 
of atoms answering to the five sense-organs, the five sense-objects and 
the four mahabhutas. These atoms are not eternal like those of the 
VaiSesikas or the Jainas. In consistency with the doctrine of momen- 
tariness (ksanikavada), they are said to spring into being from time 
to time and lapse into non-being. Even the paramanus, which 
are said to sustain the atoms, are not permanent, since they are 
subject to the fourfold process of birth, continuance, decay and 
destruction. 

The Sarvastivada admits the existence of what is called the avijnap- 
tirupa or unmanifested matter. The Buddhist theory requires that 
every physical act, word or thought should have some corresponding 
result. Every act modifies the nature and position of the molecules. 
Even where it does not do so visibly, it must do so invisibly, for it 
is impossible that an action can have no result. tA hile the Sarvasti- 
vadins admitted the reality of avij naptirupa, they were not decided 

about its nature. Harivarman, in his Scittvcisiddhi , makes out that it 

» 



720 


INDIAN PHILOSOPHY 


is neither physical nor mental and belongs to cittavipraynkta dharmas. 
As the Sarvastivadins claim that all character is ultimately material, 
avijnaptirupa is also a rupa dharma. 

Page 616, n. i. — The Caitta dharmas are distinct from citta and 
not mere phases of it as in the Yogacara. The later Sthaviravadins 
gave a relative unity to citta and caitasika dharmas, where citta is 
compared to a sphere and caitasikas to sections of it. The caitasikas 
are elements out of which mental complexes are made. “ Just as 
the four mahabhutas and the five sense-object atoms may combine in 
an infinite number of ways to form the complex external world around 
us, so may the various caitasikas be compounded in an infinite number 
of ways, ranging from the simple thoughts and desires of a child to the 
most abstruse metaphysical inference ” (McGovern: Buddhist Phil., 
p. 138). The caitasikas are broadly distinguished into (1) general 
mental properties which are neither meritorious nor demeritorious, 
(2) meritorious and (3) demeritorious. While the Sthaviravadins have 
only these three, the Sarvastivadins and the Yogacaras add a fourth 
indeterminate. 

Page 617. — See Abhidkarmakosa, iv. ib; also Stcherbatsky: The 
Conception of Buddhist Nirvana, pp. 27-29. 

Page 618. — " Pratisariikhya means conscious deliberation and is a 
type of intelligence, since it deliberates upon each of the four noble 
truths. The attainment of cessation or nirodha by means of th& 
power of deliberation is therefore called pratisamkhyanirodha, just as 
a cart pulled by bullocks is called a bullock-cart by the elimination 
of the middle term” ( Abhidhai inakosa , i. 3b; McGovern: Buddhist 
Phil., p. in). 

The Sarvastivadins “ make a difference between the essence and 
the manifestations of the dharmas. At the time of nirvana, the 
manifestations have ceased for ever, and there will be no rebirth, but 
this essence remains. It is nevertheless a kind of entity where there 
is no consciousness ” (Stcherbatsky: The Central Conception oj 

Buddhism, p. 53). 

See Abhidkarmakosa, iii. 30, where a distinction is made between 
the perception of “ blue ” and the judgment “ this is blue.” 

Page 619. — The Abhidkarmakosa insists on the importance of 
volition (see iv). The accidental destruction of a human being when 
aiming at a pumpkin is no murder. This view is perhaps intended 
against the Jaina argument that a man who slays, however unwittingly, 
is guilty of murder, even as one who touches fire, however unknowingly, 
is burned. The Abhidkarmakosa distinguishes the psychological from 
the physical effect of action. A volition leaves only an impression 
(vasana) on the mental series, while the bodily acts produce some- 
thing quasi-material, called by the scholastics, avijnapti, which persists 
and develops without any consciousness on the part of the individual. 
I he mechanism of rebirth is more clearly conceived. The last con- 
sciousness of life determines the new birth to be achieved. Rebirth 
or consciousness of conception (pratisarnltm ijnana^ is a continuation 



NOTES 


721 


of the last consciousness before death. The last consciousness of the 
dying man creates for itself the necessary body out of unorganised 
matter. 

Page 619, n. 1 . — The three are one and the same thing, functioning 
in different ways. “ The Buddhists, at least the Sarvastivadins and 
the Sthaviravadins, agree that there is only a difference in terminology, 
and that the thing spoken of is the same ” (McGovern: Buddhist Phil., 
P- 132). 

Page 621. — The Sautrantikas dispute the Vaibhasika belief in the 
existence of permanent substances persisting through all time. They 
contend that, if the past is to be regarded as real on the ground that 
it exercises efficiency, it cannot be distinguished from the present. 
It is idle to argue that we cannot know non-existent entities. Entities 
which are actually non-efficient are also known. To distinguish 
between an entity and its efficiency is untenable, for it is difficult to 
know why an entity suddenly assumes active efficiency. The Sautranti- 
kas maintain that all entities are momentary, suddenly come into 
being, exist for a moment and pass out into non-existence. Their 
existence and efficiency are one. It follows that “ things ” are mere 
names for certain momentary colours, tastes, etc., fictitiously unified 
under a label. The self is also a designation for a series of momentary 
psychic happenings which are in causal relation. Memory requires no 
self but only an earlier experience. It arises when the suitable condi- 
tions of attention, freedom from pain and the like are present. The 
last moment of the consciousness series determines the new life. It is 
not clear whether the seed of consciousness has any subtle matter 
accompanying it into a new body or not. See Keith: Budd. Phil., 
p. 166. 

“ The Sautrantikas are credited with three different views of the 
nature of the perception of an object. (1) All its characteristics are 
represented in thought form and so apprehended; (2) thought form 
is of the total actual presentation only, e.g. of variegated colour as 
such; (3) all aspects of the object are presented in thought, but it 
synthesises them in one view, e.g. the different colours are made one ” 
(ibid., 1C2 n.). 

Page 622. — According to the Abhidhavmakoia, the phenomenon of 
knowledge is resolved into a simultaneous appearance of a number 
of elements. There is no question of contact, influence or interrelation. 
A movement of colour (rupa), a movement of the visual sense (caksuh), 
a movement of pure consciousness (citta) arise simultaneously in close 
contiguity and constitute the sensation (sparSa) or colour. The 
element of consciousness always appears, supported by an object 
(visaya) and a receptive organ (indriya). The consciousness is said to 
grasp the object, since there is between consciousness and the object 
a special relation called sarupya or co-ordination. The consciousness 
apprehends the colour and not the visual sense. As a matter of fact, 
what happens is evanescent flashings of consciousness. “ Consciousness 
apprehends in the way in which a light moves. The light of a lamp 



722 


INDIAN PHILOSOPHY 


is a common metaphorical designation for an uninterrupted production 
of a series of flashing flames. When this production changes its place, 
we say that the light has moved. Similarly, consciousness is a conven- 
tional name for a chain of conscious moments. When it changes its 
place ( i.e . appears in consideration with another objective element), 
we say that it apprehends that object " ( Abhidharmskosa , ix; Stcher- 
batsky, p. 57). 

Page 622 n.—Abhidhammatthasangaha gives the four causes as hetu 
which produces the thing, the alambana or the support which produces 
the thought and its sequel, samanantara or the immediately contiguous 
cause which allows in the stream of thought the new presentation, and 
the adhipati, that on whose existence the other depends. See Keith: 
Bndd. Ph., b. 177. 

Svalaksana means the bare particular. 

Page 623. — The Sautrantikas gave up the idea of self-consciousness, 
as the consciousness of the preceding moment by the succeeding con- 
sciousness not only lights the objects but lights itself, even as the 
lamp lights not only the room but itself. All consciousness is self- 
consciousness. For the Sautrantikas, the perception of external things 
is only indirect. Things are known because consciousness takes, 
through the medium of the sense organism, the form of the object 
and is also conscious of itself. We recognise the externality of objects 
on account of their temporary and accidental character, which shows 
that they are not parts of consciousness itself. 

Page 623, n. 1. — See also Ui: The Vaisesika Philosophy, pp. 26-28. 

Page 623, n. 4. — Abhidharmakosavydkkyd, vii. 

Page 624 n. — Keith assigns Dignaga to about a.d. 400. See his 
Budd. Phil., p. 305. 

Vasubandhu’s Vijnaptimdtratdtririisat karika had nearly ten com- 
mentaries on it. Dharmapala, the teacher of Silabhadra who was the 
teacher of Yuan Chwang, wrote Vijhaptimdtratdsiddhisdstra. He up- 
holds subjective idealism in epistemology and refutes all realism. 

Page 625. — To accept the view of Sarvastivada that the world is 
the result of the changing combination of the seventy-five unchanging 
elements is to go against the central truth of impermanence. 

Page 631. — Objects arise in our consciousness as the result of our 
past experience. They seem to be given, while they are the creation 
of our thought. The external world is the product of our thought to 
which we give names and ideas (namasamjnavyavahara). See 
Lamkavatara sutra, p. 85. 

Even the internal distinctions of subject, object and knowledge are 
not real. They are the results of the defilement of thought, though 
we cannot trace the beginning of this defilement. The Alaya has no 
origin, duration or destruction. Particular intellectual movements 
stand to it as the waves to the sea. 

Page 639 n. — The Yogacaras admit eight kinds of vijnana, the five 
answering to the five material sense-organs, the sixth manovijnana of 
a more general character, exercising the functions^ of memory and 



NOTES 


723 

judgment, the seventh klistamano vijnana or literally soiled mind- 
consciousness. McGovern says regarding it: “ Whereas ni.ni nik'ana 
carries on the ordinary process of reasoning, it deals with ideas more 
or less as they come, without consciously or continuously distinguishing 
between that which appertains to the self and that which appears to 
the non-self. This continual distinction is the work of the seventh 
vijnana, which, according to the Yogacaras, functions even when a 
man is asleep, or is otherwise unconscious. It is the basis of the 
constant tendency towards the atman theory, for it falsely considers 
the alayavijiiana to be a real and permanent ego entity, although in 
reality it is in a constant state of flux ” ( Buddhist Pin l , p. 134). The 
same writer speaks of the triple function of the alayavijiiana. “ The 
first we can call the positive, because it stores up the seeds of all other 
vijnanas. The second we can call the negative, because it receives the 
influence of all the other phenomenal vijnanas. The third is this 
vijnana considered as the object of false belief, for the seventh vijhana 
constantly considers that this ever-changing alayavijnana is an eternal 
ego entity” (p. 135). The Yogacaras are inclined to call the sixth 
vijnana, the seventh man as and the eighth citta. 

Page 640, n. 1. — See McGovern: Buddhist Phil., p. 113. 

Page 643. — Kern is of opinion that Buddhism is from the outset a 
system of idealistic nihilism. See M.N., i. 4, 134, 297 and 329; ii. 261; 
iii. 246. 

Page 655. — When Nagarjuna denies Buddha, it is the Hinayana 
view of Buddha conceived as the ultimate goal of the world’s progress 
that he rejects and not the Buddha who is above all empirical deter- 
minations. See Candraklrfi’s M. Vriti, 432 ff. 

Page 662.- — The illusionist tendencies are found developed in 
Buddhapalita and Candraklrti and in a manner in Santideva, while 
the more reasonable view is found in Bhavaviveka’s exposition of 
Nagarjuna’s views. 

Page G64, n. 2. — Cp. also, 

Prabha 4 unyam manassunyam buddhiSunyam niramayam, 
Sarvasunyam nirabhasam samadhis tasya laksanam. 

Page 668. — See Kern: Manual of Indian Buddhism, p. 126. 

Page 699. — See also Keith: Buddhist Philosophy. McGovern: A 
Manual of Buddhist Philosophy. Stcherbatsky : The Central Conception 
of Buddhism ; The Conception of Buddhist Nirvana; Pratt: The 
Pilgrimage of Buddhism, chap, xii 