Old Dogs, New Tricks, and Lifelong Learning
Prologue
The point (or bottom line): Learning should be a continuous process, lasting a lifetime. I say this now because this article may sound like I am congratulating myself, whereas I am using myself as an example. Learning can occur in numerous settings: formal education, professional training, on-the-job-training (OJT), certification programs, self-improvement programs, home schooling, and so on.
“You can teach an old dog new tricks, and this old dog wants to learn.” Thomas P. O'Neill
Certification Eve
I am a few hours away from being certified as an Emergency Medical Technician (EMT). National Registry Psychomotor Skill Exams begin at 10:30 AM tomorrow and end Saturday evening. But, people ask me, why are you doing this? 
The short and immediate answer is that it supports volunteer activities I am involved with—I am not changing careers. The long answer comprises the remainder of this article.
In late August 2017, I enrolled in an EMT program at Pikes Peak Community College. When one enrolls in a college and already has a doctoral degree, word travels and people become curious. I usually just provide the short answer and settle their curiosity. But there is more to it than that.
Old Dogs
I am an old dog. Without giving away my age outright, I was four-years-old when John Fitzgerald Kennedy was assassinated. I watched Neil Armstrong take “one small step for man and one giant leap for mankind,” as he stepped off of the lunar module, Eagle, onto the surface of the moon. I secured 172 km of terrain along the West German and Czechoslovakian border (from the Austria and then north to Weiden) during the Cold War, with the aid of a few U.S. Army cavalry troopers. I was in graduate school during Desert Storm and was teaching operations research during Operation Iraqi Freedom.
New Tricks
I can learn new tricks and so can you. In May 2012, a recruiter from Clarity Solution Group (now Clarity Insights) asked me if I knew SAS. SAS (pronounced “sass”) once stood for “statistical analysis system,” but is now a company with a variety of analysis systems. However, when most people talk about SAS, they are referring to the software. To answer the recruiter’s question, I replied: “A can spell it correctly eight times out of ten.” I had used SAS in graduate school (1990-ish) on a UNIX mainframe computer, but not since then. Since, the job they wanted me to fill, immediately, required expertise with SAS Enterprise Guide and SAS Enterprise Miner, I found myself learning on my own at a rapid pace.
I am not sure anything has been more difficult than completing my Doctorate in Mathematics (1996-1999). I was only allocated three years to complete the five-year program, including the research—it was an Army fully-funded program. Had it not been for the finest professors in the business, at the University of Northern Colorado, I could easily have been unsuccessful. However, the EMT program gave UNC’s Ph.D. program a run for its money. 
Unlike other community college programs, the emergency medical programs are producing professionals that save lives, in contrast with students who are either preparing to complete an Associates Degree or go on to earn a four-year degree. My drill sergeant-like instructor, all one-hundred pounds of her, managed to reprogram 12 men (we started with a class of 21 men and three women) over the course of the last four months. Yet somehow, this “old dog” learned some new tricks.
Lifelong Learning
Lifelong learning was a “buzz-word” a few years back, when I was a doctoral student. However, I am a lifelong learner. I love to learn!
People may say, “You like learning because it is easy for you.” On the contrary, having dyslexia has made learning a challenge. I nearly flunked out of Georgia Tech in 1977, earning an “F” in Calculus I, a “C” in Chemistry, a “D” in Political Science, and dropping Physics with a “W.” I eventually graduated from Mercer University with a Bachelor of Science in Biology (1981). Although I was accepted to medical school, I accepted a commission in the U.S. Army instead. But there was more school there, as well: The Armor Officer Basic Course; the Nuclear-Biological-Chemical Officer Course; and the Infantry Mortar Platoon Officer Course.
After commanding an armored cavalry platoon, I was transferred over to the air cavalry troop to command a long-range reconnaissance platoon, which was in dire need of a leader who excelled in training. The first day on the job had us scheduled to do a demonstration air-assault for an organization day. Minutes before boarding a helicopter, I whispered to my platoon sergeant that I had never rappelled from one before. He simply said, “Watch me, sir, and do what I do.” I followed his advice, and even though I hit the ground a little hard (due to rope stretch), I survived the ordeal with no one noticing. I never attended Air Assault School, but I led this elite unit for one year, and the sergeants taught me skills I did not know (a lot) in exchange for my expertise in collective training.
The Long Answer: As I said from the beginning, the long answer is comprised by the foregoing. However, there is more. I have been saved by emergency medical services so many times, I felt it was time to give in return
Epilogue
“All men dream, but not equally. Those who dream by night in the dusty recesses of their minds, wake in the day to find that it was vanity: but the dreamers of the day are dangerous men, for they may act on their dreams with open eyes, to make them possible.” T. E. Lawrence
No matter who you are, you can learn. I went through speech therapy from 1st to 7th grades. I have dyslexia and I am an Asperger’s syndrome individual. Although I could easily be averse to learning, I love it instead. I hear people say they do not have the aptitude for this or that, but I believe they are underselling themselves. My challenge to you is to continue to learn and improve, affecting the world around you as you do: build things, cure things, invent things, be a nourishing parent, and dream in the daytime.