Preface
“I may not be a smart man, but I know what love is,” says Forest Gump. He may not have been smart, but he sure was wise. The Apostle John wrote: “This is how we know what love is: Jesus Christ laid down his life for us.” —1 John 3:16 (NIV)
There is so much information published regarding love, both secular and Christian. So, why write another book on the subject? I have several reasons. First, herein are lessons from the school of Hard Knocks. I blundered and floundered for years before I figured out love. It is something altogether different than what the world had taught me.
Second, I believe that much of what is written by Christian authors is done so out of context with Pauls’ trilogy: faith, hope, and love. I have already written about the first two and about how they are related. Now I venture to write about the third.
Finally, I write this as much for myself as for others. By writing, I also imprint the words on my mind (and my heart). There is a story of a young French soldier who, while on the surgeon's table, said: “Doctor, cut deeper, and you will find the name Napolean written on my heart.” I desire that if you cut deeper into my fabric, you will find the “name” Love written on my heart (I will elaborate on this later in the book).
Featured throughout the book is what I will call, What I Learned at The Movies. Most of these inserts are meant to contrast real love, but sometimes Hollywood accidentally produces a nugget. Perhaps love is still within us, God’s image, though it may be dormant.
Chapter 11, the Death of Love, came tome several months after completing the manuscript. It is about suicide. I hope love will engulf it.
So without further ado or fanfare, I give you Quantum Love.

 

 
The Measurability of Love
I spent much time in Quantum Phaith (Physics and Faith) laying the foundation of the “quantum” and it landscape. However, since the reader may not have had the opportunity to reflect on the first two books in this series, I will now unveil a little of it for you.
Quantum, from the Latin quantum, is the minimum amount of any physical entity involved in an interaction. In Quantum Physics, this amount is often (or always) tiny. Like the tiny mustard seed of faith, love is a small quantity, like “faith the size of a mustard seed.”.
What are the implications of being a tiny quantity? First, like faith and hop, love is measurable! We often take love for granted as something we say to another. I may say to my wife, “I love you.” This phrase may, in fact, be empty words without any measurable quantity. In other words, love has to be measurable!
How can love be measurable? When I tell my wife that I love her, I earnestly believe that it is backed up by a measurable quantity. For instance, if she could not take out her emotional yardstick and find an instance of love that she could measure, then the word is meaningless.
Small Quantities of Love
While Laurie was on a trip with the girls (AWANA Summit) this past Spring, I engaged in building a small quantity of love: I cleaned the toilet! Men, unless you have spent some time in military service, toilet cleaning is probably not a common task you perform. Thus, when my wife returned from the trip, she found the iron stains (we are on well water) removed from the toilet, shower, and tub. She also discovered new floor mats, a new toilet seat, a clean mirror, and a mopped floor. I did some other mundane tasks, but cleaning the bathroom was the ultimate measurable act of love.
How is such a thing as toilet cleaning a measurable act of love? Well, no self-respecting he-man would ever be caught dead cleaning a toilet and much less boast about such an improbable event. To do such a thing, we have to have no regard for ourselves. Rather, toilet cleaning for us guys has to be a selfless act. And therein lies the love: it is selfless—and it is measurable. Laurie can say that she knows I love her because I cleaned the toilet.
To add contrast to the foregoing argument, suppose Laurie had asked me to clean the toilet. At least two outcomes are possible. First, I could assert that I would not do it and further claim that it is not a manly thing to do. That would then be a counter-act of love, which is also measurable and certainly would be stored in the “wrong acts directory” in her memory banks (and result in a night in the “doghouse”).
Speaking of “wrongs,” Paul wrote in his first letter to the church in Corinth: “It [love] does not dishonor others, it is not self-seeking, it is not easily angered, it [love] keeps no record of wrongs.” This brings me to pose an axiom.
Love Axiom 1: Treat the wrongs that were done to you as if they were written in the sand, and the rights done for you as if they were written in stone.
Second, If I had assumed responsibility for completing the task, it would have just been registered as doing something that she had to ask me to do—a simple chore in her eyes. Doing something that someone has to ask you to do is merely complying with a request and more often than not is something YOU SHOULD HAVE DONE WITHOUT HAVING TO BE ASKED. I believe this is deposited in the “wrong acts directory” as well.
All of this leads me to state another axiom.
Love Axiom 2. Selfless acts of love are weightier that mere words and words not based on these acts are meaningless.
Biblical Measures of Love
For God so loved the world, he gave his one and only son, that the world would know what love looks like. If you grasp and believe this concept of love, you will live with God in His kingdom forever.
—John 3:16 (Jeff’s Revised Version)
God did not merely say, “I love you.” In fact, we are (were) incapable of even hearing His words. That is to say, the most powerful voice in the universe is not capable of penetrating the ears of an unrepentant heart. The only way we could possibly know His love was to observe a measurable act of it. Yet, many did not comprehend what God demonstrated with love.
John, the Apostle, wrote: 
“Dear children, let us not love with words or speech but with actions and in truth.”
—1 John 3:18 (NIV). 
He also gave the example of contributing to the material needs of others if we have the means to do so (1 John 3:19 ).
John wrote much about love that we will discuss later but know for now that he saw love manifested in the acts of Christ on earth and he told us how to love saying, “In this world, we are like Jesus.” (1 John 4:17 (NIV)) If this is indeed the case, let’s look at what Jesus did and mimic Him.
Resist Temptation
Now, how is this an act of love? Sit back and I will tell you. Luke tells us (Luke 4:2) that after His baptism, Jesus went into the wilderness alone for forty days to be tempted. This is the first thing Jesus did as he began a ministry of revealing love, a love that we had previously not comprehended. It is like God saying from above, “These people I created in My image, the very ones I gave dominion of the earth to, they do not get that I did this out of love, so I will go down to earth, live among them, and demonstrate it for them. But first I will show them that they must resist temptation in order for love to be manifested uncorrupted.”
So God in Christ did this. Yet, he bypassed the middleman (prostitutes, dope dealers, gangs, attractive girl-next-door) and went right to the source: Lucifer. Luke goes on to say that the devil tempted Christ three times, and each time Christ prevailed to refuse the temptation (Luke 4:3-13). 
This point is important for two reasons. First, it came before Jesus could begin his mission of love. Love corrupted by sin is not loving at all—it is something entirely different. One clue for understanding this is how Satan operates. The devil’s number one tool used against Christians is fear. He cannot touch us, or carry away our souls—our body and souls now belong to Christ—so he gives us something, his gift, that allows us to hinder love. John tells us, in 1 John 4:18:
“There is no fear in love, but perfect love casts out fear. For fear has to do with punishment, and whoever fears has not been perfected in love.”
Satan tempts us in order to instill fear. Although he cannot touch us or alter our standing in Christ, once we give into the fear, we are trapped in its prison in a cell from which love cannot be perfected in us. Consequently, we cannot love, and we cannot be like Jesus.
Second, Luke was inspired by the Holy Spirit to record the act. John says that not all of the acts of Christ are recorded in Scripture, in this manner:
“And there are also many other things which Jesus did, which if they were written in detail, I suppose that even the world itself would not contain the books that would be written.”
—John 21:25
Imagining that there are so many wonderful acts of love—through miracles—that could not be recorded due to text constraints, Luke recorded the temptation of Christ. This is important and should be noted.
Love Axiom 3. Love has no fear.
Breaching Gender and Cultural Bias
Jesus performed several miracles early in his ministry including, turning water into wine (stay tuned for its significance), healing a leper (Luke 5:12-16), healing a paralyzed man (Luke 5:17-16), healing a Centurion's servant (Luke 7:1-10), and raising a widow’s son (Luke 7:11-17). 
As Jesus traveled around to many parts of the region, his journey required him to pass through Samaria, which is recorded by John in his gospel (John 4:1-26). Many of you probably know the story and how Jesus spent time talking with a Samaritan woman who was living in sin. A nice story, hey. Now let’s add some context.
Samaria is a region north of Jerusalem and was at one time the land called the Kingdom of Israel comprised of ten Hebrew tribes, sometimes called the northern tribes. Its capital city was called Samaria and was located on a hill with steep yet accessible sides and a long flat top, chosen by Omri as the site of the capital of the kingdom of Israel. He “bought the hill of Samaria of Shemer for two talents of silver, and built on the hill, and called the name of the city which he built, after the name of the owner of the hill, Samaria.” (1 Kings 16:23,24) King Ahab built a temple to Baal there. (1 Kings 16:32,33) The city was twice besieged by the Syrians, in B.C. 901, (1 Kings 20:1) and in B.C. 892, (2 Kings 6:24-7; 2 Kings 6:20) but on both occasions, the siege failed. The one who could possess Samaria was considered the de facto king of Israel. (2 Kings 15:13,14)
In B.C. 721 Shalmaneser king of Assyria captured Samaria, after a siege of three years, (2 Kings 18:9,10) and the kingdom of the ten tribes came to an end. Several years later the district of which Samaria was the centered was repopulated by Esarhaddon. Consequently, the only Hebrew tribes remaining were the two southern tribes of Judah and Benjamin. Some years later the southern kingdom came under the captivity of the Babylonians, but the tribes were eventually returned to the region of the Kingdom of Judah, whereby the city of Jerusalem was reconstructed.
Alexander the Great took the city, killed many of the inhabitants, and forced the remainder to dwell in Shechem. Alexander then replaced the displaced people of Samaria with a colony of Syria-Macedonians who occupied the city until the time of John Hyrcanus, who took it after a year's siege, and did his best to demolish it entirely. (B.C. 109.) The city was rebuilt and greatly embellished by Herod the Great. He called it Sebaste Augusta , after the name of his patron, Augustus Caesar. The wall around it was 2 1/2 miles long, and in the center of the city was a park 900 feet square containing a magnificent temple dedicated to Caesar. In the New Testament, the city itself does not appear to be mentioned, but the region is the scene for our story of the Samaritan woman. (Smith, 1986)
Thus, in Jesus’s time, Samaria was occupied by pagans—the transplants from the times of the Syrian and Greek occupations. As the ten northern tribes had ceased to exist, there was bitter dissent among the Jews and their northern neighbors. It is in this setting that Jesus commits two amazing acts of love, combined in one. First, Jesus “lowers” himself by speaking to a woman (Jewish women were treated as second-class citizens). Second, Jesus lowers himself further by speaking to a Samaritan. To the male Jew, one could not be a much lower class than a Samaritan woman. 
Of all of the acts of Christ recorded in Scripture, John chose—inspired by the Holy Spirit—to write about this one. And in this episode, Jesus acts to breach the gulf of ethnical and gender prejudice, which existed in those times. As the drama unfolds, Jesus neither raises the dead or heals the sick. Rather he communicates on the level of the story’s main character, and allows her to come to the realization that she is speaking to the Messiah of Israel. What greater act of love could have been imparted here, as the Savior of the world treats this outsider as an equal?
To place this in near-present day context, let's see what I learned at the movies.
Guess Who's Coming to Dinner (1967)
Joey Drayton (Katharine Houghton) brings her fiancé, Dr. John Prentice (Sidney Poitier), home to sunny San Francisco to meet her affluent parents, Christina Drayton (Katharine Hepburn) and Matt Drayton (Spencer Tracy). Their liberal persuasions are now put to the test, for although the young man is an ideal choice (he's highly and internationally respected in the medical field, and he's impeccably mannered, handsome, well dressed and of a respectable California family), he's black. The film, which covers one busy day in the Drayton home, is essentially a drawing-room comedy, a series of cross-conversations between the young doctor and the girl’s parents, and finally between all sets of parents and offspring. A simple dinner is extended to include the doctor’s parents, who fly up from Los Angeles for the evening, and the crusty but benevolent old Irish priest, a friend of the family .
 
Joanna Drayton: He thinks you’re gonna faint because he’s a Negro.
Christina Drayton: Well... I don't think I’m going to faint, but I’ll sit down anyway.
The remake of this classice in 2005 (Guess Who) misses the relevance of the orginal story, as nothing out of the ordinary occurred—there are no measurable actions. However, in 1967, at the height of the equal-rights movement, Guess Who’s Coming for Dinner was a big deal! The truly remarkable part to me is John’s pledge that if Joey’s parents did not approve of the engagement before the evening concluded, he would call the engagement off. By the late 1960’s, pop culture was already defined as rebellious. Yet, Dr. Prentice respected his fiancé enough to know that the upheaval caused by an unsupported, mixed marriage could lead to disaster, an act that not only was wise but also measurable. Here’s an axiom:
Love Axiom 4. True love is measurable.
When I was in my senior year of high school, a drug-deal-gone-bad between two white boys and two black boys resulted in the stabbing and death of one of the black boys (I was close enough to see somesort of altercation occurring, but was unable to witness the actual assault). Parents in the community turned something that was not racial into a major incident and wave its banner high. The student body knew better and an anxious interval passed before the students view prevailed. During that time, I had very good friends of the opposite color—I am still in touch with some of them today.
Remember the Titans (2005)
Around the same period of my high school experience, T. J. Williams High School in Alexandria, Virginia, was having its own troubles. The Disney Production, Remember the Titans, told the story of a recently integrated school and how its football team bound the races together. Coach Herman Boone (Denzel Washington) is given the football team head coaching job over the future Hall-of-Famer, Coach Bill Yoast (Will Patton). Tensions are high as the team goes to Gettysburg, Pennsylvania, for the pre-season training. Through strategic leadership from Coach Boone, the team returns from camp with a bond like brothers in battle. Perhaps it is fitting that they may have come together on a battlefield.
 
Coach Boone led a early morning run to the battlefield at Gettysburg
Coach Boone: This is where they fought the battle of Gettysburg. Fifty thousand men died right here on this field, fighting the same fight that we are still fighting among ourselves today. This green field right here, painted red, bubblin' with the blood of young boys. Smoke and hot lead pouring right through their bodies. Listen to their souls, men. I killed my brother with malice in my heart. Hatred destroyed my family. You listen, and you take a lesson from the dead. If we don't come together right now on this hallowed ground, we too will be destroyed, just like they were. I don't care if you like each other of not, but you will respect each other. And maybe... I don't know, maybe we'll learn to play this game like men.
Key players, Gerry Bertier (Ryan Hurst) and Julius Campbell (Wood Harris), playing on the same defensive squad and roomed together, were as far apart as any:
Bertier: Listen, I'm Gerry, you're Julius. Let's just get some particulars and get this over with.
Campbell: Particulars? Man, no matter what I tell you, you ain't never gonna know nothing about me.
Bertier: Listen, I ain't running any more of these three-a-days.
Campbell: Well, what I've got to say, you really don't wanna hear 'cuz honesty ain't too high upon your people's priorities list.
Bertier: Honesty? You want honesty? Alright, honestly, I think you're nothing. Nothing but a pure waste of God-given talent. You don't listen to nobody, man! Not even Doc or Boone! Shiver push on the line everytime and you blow right past 'em! Push 'em, pull 'em, do something! You can't run over everybody in this league, and everytime you do you leave one of your teammates hanging out to dry, me in particular!
Campbell: Why should I give a hoot about you, huh? Or anyone else out there? You wanna talk about the ways you're the captain, right?
Bertier: Right.
 
The Julius and Gerry confrontation at pre-season training camp
Campbell: You got a job?
Bertier: I've got a job.
Campbell: You been doing your job?
Bertier: I've been doing my job.
Campbell: Then why don't you tell your white buddies to block for Rev better? Because they have not blocked for him worth a plug nickel, and you know it! Nobody plays. Yourself included. I'm supposed to wear myself out for the team? What team? Nah, nah what I'm gonna do is look out for myself and I'ma get mine.
Bertier: See man, that's the worst attitude I ever heard.
Campbell: Attitude reflects leadership, captain.
At the end of the undefeated season, just days before its state final showdown, Gerry is severely injured in a automobile accident. The follow encounter contrasts the latter and shows the relationship of two men with no regard for color.
Bertier: Well, you think I look banged up, you should see my Camaro.
Campbell: Man, I sure am sorry, man. I should have been there with you.
Bertier: What are you talking about? You would've been in that bed right next to me.
Campbell: You can't be hurt like this. You - you're Superman.
Bertier: I was afraid of you, Julius. I only saw what I was afraid of, and now I know I was only hating my brother.
Campbell: I'll tell you what, though. Um, when all this is over... me and you are gonna move out to the same neighborhood together. OK? And, um... and we'll get old, and we'll get fat. And there ain't gonna be all this black-white between us.
Bertier: [Chuckles] Left side.
Campbell: Strong side.
 
In this photo, Gerry and Julius are united in keeping the players from leaving a team meeting called by some of the players
Did love bring this team and these two men together? Did love lead them to be “color blind”? Perhaps there souls were crying out for a love that would overcome the fears they held. God’s love does just that and perhaps His love was hovering over the “face of their deep fear”, the uncharted ground they were to tread upon. Can love really accomplish that? It can and more. Here is another axiom:
Love Axiom 5: True love is color blind.
Conclusion
I could fill this book with acts of love from the Savior, but I need to save some space for other matters. So, suffice it to say that Jesus did not merely speak parables and espouse sermons from mountain tops, he set the words to actions that could be measured. 
 
The Science of Love
Fear not, for I am not going to be extremely scientific. There is enough of that in Quantum Phaith and Quantum Hope. But there is a scientific aspect of love. Actually, we merely use science to explain a Biblical concept that we cannot fathom. But first, let’s see what I learned at the movies.
50 First Dates (2004)
 
Adam Sandler and Drew Barrymore in 50 First Dates
Henry Roth (Adam Sandler) is a marine veterinarian living in a Hawaiian paradise with the company of endless women with no strings attached. This is until he meets Lucy Whitmore (Drew Barrymore). Both Henry and Lucy enjoy the company of each other and feel the start of a serious relationship occurring. Approaching Lucy the next day, Henry is confused when Lucy fails to recognize him. This is the moment Henry discovers that Lucy actually suffers from short term memory loss and can't remember each individual day. Henry won’t let this stop him and is prepared to make her fall in love with him all over again, each and every day.
Lucy: I don't know who you are, Henry... but I dream about you almost every night.
[apprehensive pause]
Lucy: Why?
Henry: What would you say if I told you that notebook you read every day used to have a lot of stuff about me in it?
Lucy: I would say that that makes a lot of sense.
Henry: You erased me from your memories because you thought you were holding me back from having a full and happy life. But you made a mistake. Being with you is the only way I could have a full and happy life. You're the girl of my dreams... and apparently, I'm the man of yours.
Lucy: [barely able to contain herself, she reaches out and shakes his hand] Henry. It's nice to meet you.
Henry: Lucy, it's nice to meet you too.
The Uncertainty Principle
Henry’s relationship with Lucy was certainly uncertain, but what follows may be crazier. In Quantum Physics, there is this thing called the Uncertainty Principle. Regarding tiny particles, like electrons and photons, if one measures the position of a particle, the very act of measurement makes it impossible to measure the particles speed with any degree of certainty—measurement alters the particles “behavior.” Likewise, if one measures the speed of a particle, it makes it impossible to measure its position with any degree of certainty. 
The Certainty Principle
I just created this principle. In regards to the love of God, there is absolutely no uncertainty. John  writes this:
“This is how we know what love is: Jesus Christ laid down his life for us.”
—1 John 3:16
Now, here is the science of the Certainty Principle. God cannot act contrary to His nature—it may be difficult to understand that God cannot do something, but we shall see that he cannot. As with any science, we should establish some definitions. Biblically speaking, to create is to make something out of nothing. Similarly, to destroy is to make nothing out of something.
It is impossible for God to destroy. He cannot do this because it is His very nature to create. You might counter this by asserting that He destroyed the world with a flood, but he didn’t. He merely transformed His original creation. Sure people died, but death comes from the devil, and we now know that Jesus conquered death and the devil through his own death and resurrection. One of my favorite movies is Braveheart, the story of a Scottish commoner named William Wallace, who he lead Scotland to gain its independence. One of my favorite lines from the movie is, “Every man dies; not every man really lives.” And it is a true fact, as opposed to a false one, that every man dies. So recall that death was a consequence of sin entering the world through Adam and not something God had created. So, God cannot act against His creative nature. Sin is the Destroyer; God is the Creator.
It is impossible for God to be tempted. I am not sure that Lucifer understood this, for if he had, Jesus would never have experienced the temptation in the wilderness (or perhaps Lucifer did not really understand that Jesus was God incarnate). But Lucifer is a quick study and learned that he needed to temp Jesus’s apostles in order to cause any trouble.
It is impossible for God to bear false witness. The author of Hebrews writes this:
“God did this so that, by two unchangeable things in which it is impossible for God to lie, we who have fled to take hold of the hope set before us may be greatly encouraged.”
—Hebrews 6:18
It is impossible for God to change. The author of Hebrews also writes this:
 “Because God wanted to make the unchanging nature of his purpose very clear to the heirs of what was promised, he confirmed it with an oath.”
—Hebrews 6:18
The author also writes:
“Jesus Christ is the same yesterday and today and forever.”
—Hebrews 13:8
In a world of change, God is a constant. There are great ramifications to this concept, but we will forego them here. Suffice it to say that God cannot act against His nature. Adam, having been created in the image of God, introduced sin into the world through disobedience and so the sin-nature is ever linked to the change-nature. We can actually do something that God, with all his power cannot do: we can sin, but God cannot.
So, love is part of the nature of God. He simply must love, for that is His essence. If we can be certain of God’s creativity, truthfulness, un-changeability, we can be certain of his love. Here is another axiom. 
Love Axiom 6. God's love is certain.
The Chemistry of Love
Now keep this in mind: sin forever corrupted our ability to be God-like. Created in His image, disobedience changed our very nature, establishing in us a sin nature. Yes, remnants of God’s image remain in us. Love is one of these. Although it is corrupted and altered, love is a part of us. Adam was meant to have one partner forever. Playing the field, adultery, homosexuality, and bigamy were never part of the original love-equation.
It has been shown scientifically that several hormones in the brain cause us to love. Among these are Adrenaline, Dopamine, Serotonin, Oxytocin, and Vasopressin. Without going into too much detail, here’s the rub, but first let’s see what I learned at the movies.
The Nutty Professor (1996)
 
Jada Pinkett and Edie Murphy in The Nutty Professor
Sherman Klump (Eddie Murphy) is a brilliant and a very fat man. One day he meets a beautiful and charming woman named Carla Purty (Jada Pinkett), and he falls in love with her. He is, however, aware of the fact that he is a clumsy fat guy, while she is a young, gorgeous lady. This makes his depressed, but just until he finds the solution to his problem. He decides to drink a potion which he invented himself in his lab. The potion makes him look very good and behaves romantically. The new him, named Buddy Love, is the perfect solution for Klump, in his opinion. But is that what Carla really wants?
[Sherman has bloated back into himself after being Buddy Love at the banquet]
Sherman Klump: If you give me a moment, I can explain. My research is, um... Well, when I started out, I wanted to help people. But then I became desperate and selfish. And what I did was wrong. Buddy's who I thought the whole world wanted me to be. He's who I thought I wanted to be. And sometimes when you want something so bad, you'll do just about anything to get it. But I learned one thing from Buddy. Life isn't about being happy with how much you weigh, but just being happy with yourself. I'm terribly sorry about all of this, I hope I haven't ruined everybody's evening. Please excuse me.
[to Carla]
Sherman Klump: Sorry.
Sherman’s chemistry experiment went awry, but we all have some pretty crazy love-chemistry.
Adrenaline. The initial stages of falling for someone activates your stress response, increasing your blood levels of adrenalin and cortisol. This has the charming effect that when you unexpectedly bump into your new love, you start to sweat, your heart races and your mouth goes dry.
Dopamine. Helen Fisher asked newly ‘love struck’ couples to have their brains examined and discovered they have high levels of the neurotransmitter dopamine. This chemical stimulates ‘desire and reward’ by triggering an intense rush of pleasure. It has the same effect on the brain as taking cocaine. Fisher suggests “couples often show the signs of surging dopamine: increased energy, less need for sleep or food, focused attention and exquisite delight in smallest details of this novel relationship.” (Fisher, 2016)
Serotonin. One of love's most important chemicals that may explain why when you’re falling in love, your new lover keeps popping into your thoughts. (Marazziti & Baroni, 2012)
Oxytocin - The cuddle hormone. Oxytocin is a powerful hormone released by men and women during orgasm. It probably deepens the feelings of attachment and makes couples feel much closer to one another after they have had sex. The theory goes that the more sex a couple has, the deeper their bond becomes. Oxytocin also seems to help cement the strong bond between mother and baby and is released during childbirth. It is also responsible for a mother’s breast automatically releasing milk at the mere sight or sound of her young baby. (Whitt, 1997) 
Vasopressin. It is another important hormone in the long-term commitment stage and is released after sex. Vasopressin (also called anti-diuretic hormone) works with your kidneys to control thirst. Its potential role in long-term relationships was discovered when scientists looked at the prairie vole. Prairie voles indulge in far more sex than is strictly necessary for the purposes of reproduction. They also – like humans - form fairly stable pair-bonds. (Arun, 2015) 
So, I propose that in the beginning when God create male and female, the brain and its hormones triggered correctly, but when sin entered the world, they began to misfire. Yet, just like the chemistry between lovers, there is a chemistry of love. There is an axiom associated with this, but it requires another ingredient from a later chapter before I can reveal it.
The Arithmetic of Love
Laurie and I poke fun at sermons that have more than three points. It seems as though every pastor writes their sermon with three key points, and when a pastor does not, he or she is an outlier and is subject to our good humor. Let’s see what I learned at the movies (technically it’s TV).
Three’s Company (1976–1984)
In Three’s Company, Janet and Chrissy are two girls who live with another girl but when she leaves they are in need of a new roommate who among other things can cook, which is what she did. The day following their roommate's going away party; they find that one of the guests, a man, who was so drunk, slept in the bathroom without their knowledge. His name is Jack Tripper, and he is a culinary student, who's living in Y (YMCA). They ask him if he would like to move in with them. He agrees. But their landlord Mr. Roper doesn’t agree until he is told that Jack’s gay. So Jack has to pretend and allow Mr. Roper to think that he is gay, but it’s difficult for a swinging guy like Jack not to suppress his interest in girls. 
After a few seasons, the Ropers were spun-off into their own show. So, Mr. Roper sold the building, and the new building manager is Ralph Furley, a guy who thinks himself a ladies’ man. The following season, Suzanne Somers who plays Chrissy got into a little dispute with the producers and would eventually be written off, and to fill the void she left, the character of Cindy, Chrissy's cousin was added. The following season, Cindy left to go to college, and they got a new roommate Terri, a nurse. It seems that the rental relationship was incomplete without three roommates and they would go to extremes to maintain a trio—of course, the name of the series and it plot drove the number three.
 
Trios and Love
In spite of Paul Simon’s “50 Ways to Leave Your Lover” (1975), there are three ways to stay with your lover. Like the television show, three makes love complete.
The True Trio
If you are thinking Father, Son, and Holy Spirit, then you win the grand prize. God, the Trinity, is not complete without three persons. Consequently, God cannot express His love without the trio. This is made evident with the Gospel. God the Father needed to reconcile humankind to Himself. He needed God the Son to be the vehicle for reconciliation through His death and resurrection, and this required God the Holy Spirit to fill the gap after the Son ascended into heaven. 
Creation required the Trinity as well. Christ is the logos according to John the Apostle:
“In the beginning was the Word, and the Word was with God, and the Word was God. He was with God in the beginning. Through him all things were made; without him, nothing was made that has been made.”
—John 1:1-3
The logos is literally the spoken word. When we observe instances of God speaking in the Old Testament, it is the preincarnate Christ doing the talking. The logos spoke to Moses from a burning bush, for instance. Thus, it was the logos who proclaimed, on behalf of the trinity, “Let there be light.” If you want to know more about the details of creation, read Quantum Phaith and Quantum Hope. (To tease you, there really was a big bang, and it resulted from these words, “Let there be light.”) Of course, it was the Spirit who was “hovering over the face of the waters,” (Genesis 1:2 NIV) representing the Trinity at “ground level.” And the Father orchestrated the whole process.
The Model Trio
Well, if you think that this must be marriage, then you get a gold star. Believe it or not, marriage is the union of three, not two. It is the covenant relationship between a man, a woman, and God. Like the roommates without Jack Tripper, a marriage without God is incomplete. Without God’s presence, true love cannot function. We will see why this is so in a later chapter, so suffice it to say that Love requires Three. In other words, when it comes to Love, three is company rather than a crowd. No matter how you do the math, Love – 1 = 0.
Love Axiom 7. It takes three to love.
So the Trinity works out the equation of the Trio so that Love is effectual.
Conclusion
In a fashion, the whole aspect of Love can be broken down into parts with physics, chemistry, and mathematics. Of course, I have merely used the three disciplines of science to describe something that may truly be indescribable, or at least incomprehensible to our mortal minds. But I am not uncertain that Love is certain, that it is embedded in our chemical makeup, and that it requires a trio.
 
 
The Anatomy of Love
“I love coffee in a cup, little fuzzy pups, Sunday school in May and hay…” Tom T. Hall release this Country song in 1973. You may have your own list of things you love. Mine is
	Hiking
	Writing
	My wife
	My children
	The Atlanta Braves
	Eros
But in reality, true love is not the proper expression for all of these. So, let’s dissect love into its proper parts. First let’s see what I learned at the movies.
For the Love of the Game (1999)
 
Kevin Costner as Detroit pitcher Billy Chapel
Detroit Tiger great Billy Chapel (Kevin Costner), a 40-year old baseball pitcher, wants nothing more than to reconnect with his one-time lover, Jane Aubrey (Kelly Preston). On the morning he’s to pitch the last game of the season, perhaps the last game of his career, she tells him she’s leaving that evening for a job in London; he also learns that the Detroit Tigers’ new owners plan to trade him. As Billy pitches that night to the NY Yankees, he has flashbacks of his torrid relationship in which He refuses to let Jane in on the most private part of his life, baseball. Thus the entire movie plot takes place from the pitcher’s mound at Yankee Stadium, where he had taken Jane to her first ballgame. Announcer Vince Scully calls the scene:
“And you know Steve you get the feeling that Billy Chapel isn't pitching against left handers, he isn't pitching against pinch hitters, he isn't pitching against the Yankees. He's pitching against time. He's pitching against the future, against age, and even when you think about his career, against ending. And tonight I think he might be able to use that aching old arm one more time to push the sun back up in the sky and give us one more day of summer.”
As he pitches and flashes back in time, he must make two decisions: whether to accept the trade or quit the game he loves, and whether to let Jane share that part of his life encompassed by baseball. Meanwhile, with Vin Scully announcing, one Yankee batter after another fails to reach first base. In the middle of the eighth inning, his catcher Gus Sinski (John C. Reilly) comes to the mound. Chapel looks at the scoreboard, “Has anyone been on base?” He was too busy sorting out his life and his relationship with Jane that he didn't realize what he was doing. Gus tells him that no one has been on base. 
Billy Chapel: I don't know if I have anything left.
Gus Sinski: You just throw whatever you got, whatever's left. The boys are all here for ya, we'll back you up, we'll be there, cause, Billy, we don't stink right now. We're the best team in baseball, right now, right this minute, because of you. You're the reason. We're not gonna screw that up, we're gonna be awesome for you right now. Just throw.
Can Billy pitch a perfect game? And what will come next for Billy, the Tigers, and Jane? In the top of the 9th inning , Billy grabs a baseball from the dugout and write on it a message to the Tigers owner: “Tell them I'm through, ‘for love of the game’, Billy Chapel.” 
That night, as he has accomplished what few major league pitchers ever experience, a perfect game, he realizes that he did not have Jane to share it with. Being alone on the mound was a reflection of being alone in his life. And so, he goes to the airport to follow Jane to London, not knowing that she missed her flight will watching him perform. Running into her at the airport was unexpected.
“I used to believe, I still do, that if you give something your all it doesn't matter if you win or lose, as long as you've risked everything, put everything out there. And I've done that. I did it my entire life. I did it with the game. But I never did it with you, I never gave you that. And I'm sorry. I know I'm on really thin ice but, when you said I didn't need you... well last night should've been the biggest night of my life, and it wasn't. It wasn't because you weren't there. So I just wanted to tell you, not to change your mind or keep you from going, but just so you know, that I know, that I do need you.”
The Things I am Passionate About
Passion is best described by the Greek word eros, called after the Greek god Eros, the god of love. In most of its use, eros refers to passionate love as it relates to sex. However, this is not the sole use. Eros can also mean passion for other stuff like I am passionate about baseball, but there are other Greek words better suited for this instance. Eros is not used in the New Testament (recall that the NT was written in Greek). Certainly, there was an eros aspect of Billy’s relationship with Jane.
The Things I Enjoy
The Greek word ludos is a better way to render, “I love baseball.” It describes our “love” for pastimes, like going to the bar with friends, playing soccer, or other activities. They is nothing inherently wrong with ludos unless we begin to enjoy an activity so much as to live for it or worship it. Then it becomes something else, like lust. Billy had a ludos relationship with baseball.
The Things I Lust After
In the Old Testament, Israel was constantly accused of lusting after other gods or idols. The Greek word for this is epithumia. We can lust after people, activities, or idols, but we usually think of the word as it relates to a relationship outside of marriage. Keep in mind here, that the relationship between God and Israel as well as Christ and the church is described as a marriage. For instance, Christ is the groom, and we (the church) are the bride (Matthew 9:15; 25:1, 5, 6, 10). Epithumia is used at least 14 times in the New Testament. We catch glimpses of epithumia in For the Love of the Game.
The Things I have Affection For
This refers to natural affection and the Greek word, storge. Although storge does not appear in the new testament, the antonym astorge is used by Paul, in describing people when the last days come.
“But know this, that in the last days perilous times will come: For men will be lovers of themselves, lovers of money, boasters, proud, blasphemers, disobedient to parents, unthankful, unholy, unloving, unforgiving, slanderers, without self-control, brutal, despisers of good, traitors, headstrong, haughty, lovers of pleasure rather than lovers of God, having a form of godliness but denying its power. And from such people turn away!”
—2 Timothy 3:1-5 (NKJV)
Other translations render unloving in verse 3 as “without natural affection.” Like the affection a mother naturally has for her child.
The People I Like
The Greek word phileo carries the meaning of friendship. The Greeks valued this more than passion and it generally referred to the bonds of brothers in arms who fought together on a battlefield. This word appears many times in the New Testament. I believe that Billy, after some time, had a phileo relationship with Jane. But phileo expects something in return, and Billy could not give Jane what she needed. I am not sure Billy ever made it to the next level of love.
The Things I Love
The subject of this book is best described by the Greek word, agape ̅. This word refers to the love of God, what I have called real or true love. The word is not found in classical Greek literature but us the prominent word for love in the New Testament. It differs from phileo as best indicated in John’s Gospel.
Jesus: So when they had eaten breakfast, Jesus said to Simon Peter, “Simon, son of Jonah, do you love (agape ̅) Me more than these?”
Peter: He said to Him, “Yes, Lord; You know that I love (phileo) You.”
Jesus: He said to him, “Feed My lambs.”
Jesus: He said to him again a second time, “Simon, son of Jonah, do you love (agape ̅) Me?”
Peter: He said to Him, “Yes, Lord; You know that I love (phileo) You.”
Jesus: He said to him, “Tend My sheep.”
Jesus: He said to him the third time, “Simon, son of Jonah, do you love (phileo) Me?” Peter was grieved because He said to him the third time, “Do you love (phileo) Me?”
Peter: And he said to Him, “Lord, You know all things; You know that I love (phileo) You.
Jesus: Jesus said to him, “Feed My sheep.”
—John 21:15-17
Agape ̅ is best defined by its description in 1 Corinthians 13, where Paul writes:
“Love is patient and kind; love does not envy or boast; it is not arrogant or rude. It does not insist on its own way; it is not irritable or resentful; it does not rejoice at wrongdoing, but rejoices with the truth.  Love bears all things, believes all things, hopes all things, endures all things. Love never ends.”
—1 Corinthians 13:4-8a.
So let’s break love down into its elements:
	Love is patient
	Love is kind
	Love does not envy
	Love does not boast
	Love  is not arrogant
	Love is not rude
	Love does not insist on its own way
	Love  is not irritable 
	Love is not resentful 
	Love does not rejoice at wrongdoing
	Love rejoices with the truth
	Love bears all things
	Love believes all things
	Love hopes all things
	Love endures all things
	Love never ends
Love is not an Emotion
The immediate thing I glean from Paul’s description is that love is not an emotion. Yet, Tina Turner sang:
What's love got to do, got to do with it
What's love but a second-hand emotion
I do not know if the young millionaire, Forrest Gump, really understood love, but I don’t think it was an emotion for him. So let’s see what I learned at the movies.
Forrest Gump (1994)
 
Forrest (Tom Hanks) and Jenny (Robin Wright) in front of her father’s old house
Forrest Gump had a different understanding of love than expressed by Tina or experienced by Billy. The fictional Forrest Gump, portrayed in the movie by Tom Hanks, was an imbecile from Alabama with such a low IQ that he was almost kicked out of public school (Mrs. Gump, played by Sally Fields, intervened). Forrest may have been slow, but boy could he run fast, so fast that he was recruited to play football for the university of Alabama. But I am getting ahead of myself.
Forrest was an outcast, but young Jenny befriended him early in his school years. According to Forrest, Jenny and he were “like peas and carrots.” But Jenny had a dark side imposed by an abusive father, which drove her to drugs and sex. Forrest was not a part of that aspect of her life. Through the years, Forrest had occasional contact with Jenny who would not accept his gestures of love. After joining the Army, fighting in Vietnam, playing ping Pong for the USA, and running across the country several times from coast to coast, Jenny still rejected his overtures. One evening Forrest told Jenny:
“I may not be a smart man, but I know what love is.”
Jenny bedded with him that night but left before daybreak ad would eventually have Forrest’s son. By the time Forrest discovered he was a father, years had passed. Knowing that Jenny was dying from AIDS, Forrest once again proposed marriage and Jenny finally accepted. Forrest loved Jenny from nearly the time he met here in grade school and well past her death. Tina Turner did not know understand love. Forrest did indeed know what love is.
What Kind of Love is This?
At an emotional level, I could never love, and I doubt that any of you could. Who could love (all the time) and not be irritated, not be resentful, not be rude, not be envious, and not be arrogant? Who could love (all the time) and be kind, endure everything, bear everything, and rejoice in the truth? It would require super-powers. It would require someone like God who was manifested to us in Christ. He loves because it is his nature to do so. It is difficult for me to comprehend an entity whose very nature is Love, but John tells us God is love!
“Beloved, let us love one another, for love is from God, and whoever loves has been born of God and knows God. Anyone who does not love does not know God, because God is love.”
—1 John 4:7-8 (ESV)
Sometimes, I do not feel like loving, and I imagine that Laurie feels the same, but more often. Lee Brice has a country song along these lines, “Hard to Love.” Here is verse one and the chorus:
I am insensitive, I have a tendency
To pay more attention to the things that I need
Sometimes I drink too much, sometimes I test your trust,
Sometimes I don't know why you're staying with me
I'm hard to love, hard to love,
Oh I don't make it easy,
I couldn't do it if I stood where you stood
I'm hard to love, hard to love,
You say that you need me,
I don't deserve it but I love that you love me good
It would seem that both Jenny and Lee are hard to love. But they are still loved. The Apostle Paul puts it this way:
“But God demonstrates His own love toward us, in that while we were still sinners, Christ died for us. Much more then, having now been justified by His blood, we shall be saved from wrath through Him. For if when we were enemies we were reconciled to God through the death of His Son, much more, having been reconciled, we shall be saved by His life.”
—Romans 5:8-10
We were sinners and enemies of God. Nevertheless, God sent the Son to the kingdom of earth, ruled by Satan and encased by sin and death, to make the permanent and lasting sacrifice required by His justice in order to restore his creation unto Himself. God’s nature requires justice and love, so the only solution to reconcile his estranged and hard-hearted children were to sacrifice part of Himself, the logos-incarnate. He suffered rejection from those who expected Him, ridicule from the leaders of His chosen people, mocked by the conquering Romans, beaten in public, made to carry His own cross to a mountain top, was nailed to it, and then crucified. He was buried in a borrowed tomb that could not contain His love, and so He rose from the dead on the third day after His death and ascended into heaven to rule at the side of the Father. All of this for love. 
Who would you feel like dying that for? Certainly, Jesus did not feel like being crucified as sweat drops of blood and prayed to the Father to take that cup from Him if there was no other way (Luke 22:44). If you believe love is an emotion, think again! And here is another axiom:
Love Axiom 8. Love is not an emotion.
God’s love is unfathomable. His love requires nothing in return. We cannot earn it, we cannot affect it, but we can reject it. But there is never a point of no return. As Forrest accepted Jenny without question at the end of her troubled life, so God stands ready to accept us in like manner due to His love.


 
The Geometry of Love
“And now we have these three: faith and hope and love, but the greatest of these is love.”
—1 Corinthians 13:13 (NLV)
In Quantum Phaith we explored the essence of faith, its relation with science and how it explains our entire universe from creation and onward. In Quantum Hope we investigated how Faith is founded in Hope and the fact that our hope is a person, Jesus Christ. Faith is not a flimsy façade and hope is not an imaginary idea. Instead, faith is the foundation of science and hope is the solid rock of faith. So where does love take its place?
The answer is not provided by John, the “Apostle of Love”, nor by Corinthians 13, the “Love Chapter.” Instead, it is found in another letter from Paul, addressing justification by faith.
Therefore, since we have been justified by faith, we have peace with God through our Lord Jesus Christ. Through him we have also obtained access by faith into this grace in which we stand, and we rejoice in hope of the glory of God. Not only that, but we rejoice in our sufferings, knowing that suffering produces endurance, and endurance produces character, and character produces hope, and hope does not put us to shame, because God's love has been poured into our hearts through the Holy Spirit who has been given to us.
For while we were still weak, at the right time Christ died for the ungodly. For one will scarcely die for a righteous person—though perhaps for a good person one would dare even to die— but God shows his love for us in that while we were still sinners, Christ died for us. Since, therefore, we have now been justified by his blood, much more shall we be saved by him from the wrath of God. For if while we were enemies we were reconciled to God by the death of his Son, much more, now that we are reconciled, shall we be saved by his life. More than that, we also rejoice in God through our Lord Jesus Christ, through whom we have now received reconciliation.
—Romans 5:1-11
The Equation of Love
If the Trio were the equation for a line, Hope would be the right-hand side, Faith would be y-intercept, Love would be the slope of the line, and the independent variable would be what we do with Love.
Faith + Love (our response) = Hope
This implies that our Hope is a function of our Faith and Love.
If our response is zero, Love drops out of the equation (and so do we) and we are left with Faith = Hope. If we have little faith, our hope is not great. If we have Faith and our response to Love is decreasing, our Hope also decreases. However, if our response to Love is increasing, we have greater Hope. So, our positive response to Love is what causes the equation to be monotonically increasing. Love brings it all together, but only if we accept it!
 
The relationship between more love, faith, and hope
Faith causes us to endure a whole lot of stuff, and this process produces hope, which is certain due to God pouring His love onto us. That is not quite the way Paul phrased it, so I will blend the two:
Since [the Father has justified us as children] by Faith, we have peace with God through our Lord Jesus Christ. Through [Christ] we have also obtained access by Faith into this grace in which we stand, and we rejoice in the Hope [that is Jesus Christ]. Not only that, but we rejoice in our sufferings, knowing that [this causes a chain reaction of stuff] producing hope, and Hope [is firmly established], because God's certain Love has been poured into our hearts through the Holy Spirit.
—Romans 5:1-5
So if Love is free, then actively or passively receiving it profits us. On the other hand, if love costs us do we lose hope? On the contrary, we just to increase love and/or have greater faith (and grant me grace for altering Scripture).
 
The effect of increasing love and faith on hope
The Cost and Profit of Love
“Love is a Many Splendid Thing” is a song with music by Sammy Fain and lyrics by Paul Francis Webster, which was made popular in a 1955 movie bearing the song title winning it an Academy Award for Best Original Song. Frank Sinatra sang these lyrics:
Love is a many-splendid thing,
It's the April rose that only grows in the early spring,
Love is nature's way of giving a reason to be living,
The golden crown that makes a man a king.
Lost on a high and windy hill,
In the morning mist two lovers kissed and the world stood still,
When our fingers touch my silent heart has taught us how to sing,
Yes, true love's a many-splendid thing.
And yes, love is a many-splendid thing. Yet is come at a price. We have already explored one aspect of this: the cost incurred by God. Now we must examine what it might cost us.
What love (or our response to it) might cost us is a strange thing to consider since we know that the love of God is free. But let’s put is back in context. We are on a journey from alienation with the Trinity on a road that starts with Faith destined for Hope and directed by Love (the slope or direction of the line). Love gets us from Faith to Hope, but the journey occurs in this fallen world, ruled by Lucifer. We are walking in enemy territory all the way. The stuff that we must go through is “our sufferings [in which we must rejoice], knowing that suffering produces endurance, and endurance produces character, and character produces hope…”
Walking through Enemy Territory
We honor our soldiers who fight in the name of our country, whether we agree with the fight or not. If you choose to accept God’s love, you enter a war zone right in the middle of enemy territory, and most of us are not trained or equipped to be there, unlike our soldier heroes. So, let’s go through a little Basic Training.
Band of Brothers (2001)
Band of Brothers, by producer Tom Hanks, is the story of “E” Easy Company, 506th Parachute Infantry Regiment of the 101st Airborne Division from their initial training starting in 1942 to the end of World War II. They parachuted behind enemy lines in the early hours of D-Day in support of the landings at Utah beach, participated in the liberation of Carentan and again parachuted into action during Operation Market Garden. They occupied a crossroads region near Bastogne in Belgium and were surrounded by the Germans during the Christmas of 1944 with inadequate clothing, few rations, and very little ammunition. They held the line in a fight we know as the Battle of the Bulge. They also liberated a concentration camp and were the first to enter Hitler’s mountain retreat in Berchtesgaden. This is a fascinating but true tale of comradeship that is, in the end, a tale of ordinary men who did extraordinary things.
 
 [Easy Company is patrolling through the Bavarian woods]
Frank Perconte: Hey, George.
George Luz: Yeah?
Frank Perconte: Kind of remind you of Bastogne?
George Luz: Yeah, now that you mention it. Except, of course, there's no snow, we got warm grub in our bellies, and the trees aren't [bleep’in] exploding from Kraut artillery, but yeah... Frank... other than that, it's a lot like Bastogne.
Frank Perconte: Right?
George Luz: Bull, smack him for me please?
[thump]
George Luz: Thank you.
Shorty after this conversation, in April 1945, Easy Company liberated Kaufering (two separate camps from male and female Jews). Kaufering concentration camps were a network of subsidiary camps of the Dachau concentration camp. But I am once again off course.
 
The real crux of the matter is how did Easy Company (and the rest of the 101st Airborne Division) held Bastogne or even survived the ordeal? So let’s start our basic training.
 Suppose we use our geometry graph and say that we start at the origin (0,0) with no Faith and no Love. Giving a little love moves us immediately into enemy territory, north of the neutral line, and we may be at our “spiritual Bastogne”. We can increase our faith and remain in friendly territory, but love advances us.

Our Combat Condition
There are several things I want you to know, but first there is this. Having faced death a couple of times and having a disease that will probably end with my death, people may ask me am I afraid. I can honestly say no. Ronald Speirs, one of the commanders of Easy Company, said it best.
“The only hope you have is to accept the fact that you're already dead. The sooner you accept that, the sooner you'll be able to function as a soldier is supposed to function: without mercy, without compassion, without remorse. All war depends upon it.”
I was born dead, dead in my trespasses, dead due to Adam’s disobedience. I remained dead until I realized that because of God’s love for me, Christ conquered death for me. Death cannot harm me. In fact, dead doesn’t look all that bad, knowing I will spend eternity with God. This is the fundamental thing a soldier in enemy territory must grasp. The author of Hebrews wrote:
Since therefore the children share in flesh and blood, he himself likewise partook of the same things, that through death he might destroy the one who has the power of death, that is, the devil, and deliver all those who through fear of death were subject to lifelong slavery
—Hebrews 2:14-15 (ESV)
And here is an axiom.
Love Axiom 9. Love conquered death.
Fear is something nearly every human (if not all) have dealt with, are dealing with, of will deal with. It inhibits everything you do including your ability to love. John also has something to say regarding fear:
“There is no fear in love (agape ̅), but perfect love (agape ̅) casts out fear. For fear has to do with punishment, and whoever fears has not been perfected in love.”
—1 John 4:18
Of course, This gives us another axiom:
Love Axiom 10. Love casts out all fear.
Our Combat Situation
A verse that comforts me is a one that was written by another soldier in the middle of enemy territory.
Yea, though I walk through the valley of the shadow of death,
I will fear no evil;
For You [God] are with me;
Your rod and Your staff, they comfort me.
—Psalm 23:4 (NKJV)
An entire army was on the hunt for David, yet he wrote this: I will fear no evil. And David did not have the luxury of knowing what Christ was going to do over 1000 years before He did it. But David understood the Love of God. He knew that this love would deliver him, one way or another. He also knew that the army of God was more powerful than the army of King Saul. He “destroyed the one who has power over death.” (Hebrews 2:14b)
Love Axiom 11. Love comes backed with ultimate power
Our Combat Equipment
In a letter to the church at Ephesus, Paul wrote these words:
Finally, be strong in the Lord and in the strength of his might. Put on the whole armor of God, that you may be able to stand against the schemes of the devil. For we do not wrestle against flesh and blood, but against the rulers, against the authorities, against the cosmic powers over this present darkness, against the spiritual forces of evil in the heavenly places. Therefore take up the whole armor of God, that you may be able to withstand in the evil day, and having done all, to stand firm. Stand therefore, having fastened on the belt of truth, and having put on the breastplate of righteousness, and, as shoes for your feet, having put on the readiness given by the gospel of peace. In all circumstances take up the shield of faith, with which you can extinguish all the flaming darts of the evil one; and take the helmet of salvation, and the sword of the Spirit, which is the word of God, praying at all times in the Spirit, with all prayer and supplication. To that end keep alert with all perseverance, making supplication for all the saints, and also for me, that words may be given to me in opening my mouth boldly to proclaim the mystery of the gospel, for which I am an ambassador in chains, that I may declare it boldly, as I ought to speak.
Soldiers fighting in Iraq during Operation Iraqi Freedom found themselves inadequately equipped. For instance, the civilian market had better body armor than the Army issued flak vests. Soldiers just needed internet access and a credit card to better equip themselves. Their issued body army was not effective against some improvised explosive devices (IEDs). On the contrary, the shield of faith  “can extinguish ALL the flaming darts of the evil one” (emphasis is mine). This is to say that the equipment provided by the Lord is absolutely impenetrable and unequally effective against any spiritual weapon. If you have to go through enemy territory ragging with bullets and artillery, get on the internet and order some equipment. If you walk onto the spiritual battlefield, take the equipment offered by the God of love. And here is another axiom.
Love Axiom 12. Love equips us for every situation
Our Combat Force Strength
Before Israel had kings, they had judges. One of these was a man named Gideon. 
Now the angel of the Lord came and sat under the terebinth at Ophrah, which belonged to Joash the Abiezrite, while his son Gideon was beating out wheat in the winepress to hide it from the Midianites. And the angel of the Lord appeared to him and said to him, “The Lord is with you, O mighty man of valor.” And Gideon said to him, “Please, sir,[a] if the Lord is with us, why then has all this happened to us? And where are all his wonderful deeds that our fathers recounted to us, saying, ‘Did not the Lord bring us up from Egypt?’ But now the Lord has forsaken us and given us into the hand of Midian.” And the Lord[b] turned to him and said, “Go in this might of yours and save Israel from the hand of Midian; do not I send you?” And he said to him, “Please, Lord, how can I save Israel? Behold, my clan is the weakest in Manasseh, and I am the least in my father's house.” And the Lord said to him, “But I will be with you, and you shall strike the Midianites as one man.”
—Judges 6:11-16
Sounds a bit like a precursor to David, hey? Wait until you hear the battle plan!
The Lord said to Gideon, “The people with you are too many for me to give the Midianites into their hand, lest Israel boast over me, saying, ‘My own hand has saved me.’ 3 Now, therefore, proclaim in the ears of the people, saying, ‘Whoever is fearful and trembling, let him return home and hurry away from Mount Gilead.’” Then 22,000 of the people returned, and 10,000 remained.
And the Lord said to Gideon, “The people are still too many. Take them down to the water, and I will test them for you there, and anyone of whom I say to you, ‘This one shall go with you,’ shall go with you, and anyone of whom I say to you, ‘This one shall not go with you,’ shall not go.” So he brought the people down to the water. And the Lord said to Gideon, “Everyone who laps the water with his tongue, as a dog laps, you shall set by himself. Likewise, everyone who kneels down to drink.” And the number of those who lapped, putting their hands to their mouths, was 300 men, but all the rest of the people knelt down to drink water. And the Lord said to Gideon, “With the 300 men who lapped I will save you and give the Midianites into your hand, and let all the others go every man to his home.” So the people took provisions in their hands, and their trumpets. And he sent all the rest of Israel every man to his tent, but retained the 300 men. And the camp of Midian was below him in the valley.
—Judges 7:2-8
The strength of the army of Midian are not explicitly provided and the numbers presumed are disputed, but if we take the lowest estimate (Judges 8:10), Gideon’s 300 faced over 135,000 Midianites. Here’s another axiom.
Love Axiom 13. Love cares not about numbers.
Basic training usually lasts weeks. You only need to read and accept a few paragraphs here and meditate on some Scripture. But there one other thing that soldiers go through in basic training. The drill sergeants deprogram the troops and then reprogram them. They take away all the baggage that comes along with being a civilian so that they can be programmed into being effective soldiers. For Easy Company, this occurred at Toccoa, Georgia. The most prominent local landmark on the camp site is Currahee Mountain. Paratroopers in training ran from the camp up the mountain and back numerous times. Members of the 506th Parachute Infantry Regiment still refer to themselves as “Currahees”, derived from the Cherokee word gurahiyi, which means “stand alone, together.” Currahee taught the soldiers of Easy Company to stand alone, together. This is what carried them through the winter of 1944 at the crossroads near Bastogne. 
In the Shakespeare story of Henry V. The St. Crispin’s day speech is well known by many soldiers to this day. On the morning of 25 October 1415, shortly before the Battle of Agincourt, Henry V made a brief speech to the English army under his command, emphasizing the justness of his claim to the French throne and harking back to the memory of previous defeats the English kings had inflicted on the French. A portion of this speech is provided below.
This day is call'd the feast of Crispian.
He that outlives this day, and comes safe home,
Will stand a tip-toe when this day is nam'd,
And rouse him at the name of Crispian.
He that shall live this day, and see old age,
Will yearly on the vigil feast his neighbours,
And say “To-morrow is Saint Crispian.”
Then will he strip his sleeve and show his scars,
And say “These wounds I had on Crispin's day.”
Old men forget; yet all shall be forgot,
But he'll remember, with advantages,
What feats he did that day. Then shall our names,
Familiar in his mouth as household words—
Harry the King, Bedford and Exeter,
Warwick and Talbot, Salisbury and Gloucester—
Be in their flowing cups freshly rememb'red.
This story shall the good man teach his son;
And Crispin Crispian shall ne'er go by,
From this day to the ending of the world,
But we in it shall be remembered-
We few, we happy few, we band of brothers;
For he to-day that sheds his blood with me
Shall be my brother; be he ne'er so vile,
This day shall gentle his condition;
And gentlemen in England now a-bed
Shall think themselves accurs'd they were not here,
And hold their manhoods cheap whiles any speaks
That fought with us upon Saint Crispin's day.
The English won a victory at the Battle of Agincourt, which gave birth to the legend that was immortalized in William Shakespeare's King Henry V. The battle took place in a muddy farmer's field in northern France on October 25, 1415 and was one in a series of encounters between France and England that has become known as the Hundred Years' War (1337-1453). The battle came at the end of a long British campaign on the continent, and the they were badly outnumbered by French forces. 
For Christian’s, our Currahee is Mount Calvary. Our St. Crispian Day is Easter, and we too “stand alone, together.” This is why the Christian man in Auckland, New Zealand, whom I have never met, is my brother. For we walk through enemy territory together and we fight this fight together, on a spiritual plane. Our drill sergeant is the Holy Spirit, and we have been transformed or reprogrammed to live as Christ followers, leaving behind the world and our civilian lives. If you are a Christ Follower, you too are my brother (or sister) and a fellow soldier. And here is another axiom.
Love Axiom 14. Love binds us together as brothers and sisters.
So abide these three: Faith, Hope, and Love. And yes the greatest of these is Love.
 
 
The Greatness of Love
God is described in Scripture as being a just God, a mighty fortress, our rock and firm foundation. He is merciful and full of grace, and so on. But as far as I have found, the only time God’s essence is encapsulated with one word, it is Love. John tells us,
God is love.
—1 John 4:8b
We take for granted that God is “like” a mighty fortress, and “like” solid rock. However, God is not “like” love. He is love! So how great is this love?
Greater Love
“Greater love has no one than this, that someone lay down his life for his friends.”
—John 15:13 (ESV)
I just checked the list of the 100 best love movies of all times. Sleepless in Seattle did not make it; An Affair to Remember did. If you saw the former, you know that the latter is part of the former. Well, the women in the latter do cry over the former. Tom Hanks claims to shed tears when Jim Brown is killed in The Dirty Dozen. But whether latter or former or otherwise, you have to admit all three are pretty darn good movies.
Sleepless in Seattle (1993)
After his wife Maggie passes away, Sam Baldwin (Tom Hanks) and his 8-year-old son Jonah (Ross Malinger) relocate from Chicago to Seattle to escape the grief associated with Maggie's death. Eighteen months later Sam is still grieving and can't sleep. Although Jonah misses his mother, he wants his father to get a new wife despite Sam having not even contemplated dating again. On Christmas Eve, Sam (on Jonah's initiative) ends up pouring his heart out on a national radio talk show about his magical and perfect marriage to Maggie, and how much he still misses her. 
Doctor Marcia Fieldstone: People who truly loved once are far more likely to love again. Sam, do you think there's someone out there you could love as much as your wife?
Sam Baldwin: Well, Dr. Marcia Fieldstone, that's hard to imagine.
Doctor Marcia Fieldstone: What are you going to do?
Sam Baldwin: Well, I'm gonna get out of bed every morning... breathe in and out all day long. Then, after a while I won't have to remind myself to get out of bed every morning and breathe in and out... and, then after a while, I won't have to think about how I had it great and perfect for a while.
Doctor Marcia Fieldstone: Tell me what was so special about your wife?
Sam Baldwin: Well, how long is your program? Well, it was a million tiny little things that, when you added them all up, they meant we were supposed to be together... and I knew it. I knew it the very first time I touched her. It was like coming home... only to no home I'd ever known... I was just taking her hand to help her out of a car and I knew. It was like... magic.
Among the many women who hear Sam's story and fall in love with him solely because of it is Annie Reed (Meg Ryan), a Baltimore-based newspaper writer. Annie's infatuation with Sam's story and by association Sam himself is despite being already engaged. But Annie's relationship with her straight-laced fiancé Walter is unlike her dream love life in the movie An Affair to Remember (1957). She even writes to Sam proposing they meet atop the Empire State Building on Valentine's Day. Back in Seattle, Sam has received hundreds of letters from women wanting to meet him. Jonah is excited by one letter in particular from Baltimore and will do whatever he needs to get his father and Annie together. However, old fashioned Sam wants his future love life to be based on meeting a woman the traditional way and he, in turn, becomes infatuated with an unknown woman he spots a few times in Seattle. 
 
Suzy (Rita Wilson) cries over her memory of “A Night to Remember”
Jonah decides to go to New York City himself to meet Annie and Sam, of course, goes after him. He doesn’t catch up to Jonah until he gets to the observation deck of the Empire State Building, where Jonah has been patiently waiting for Annie to appear. Jonah and Sam get on the down elevator just as Annie is exiting the elevator she’s on. They miss each other. However, Annie discovers Jonah's backpack with Howard, his teddy bear, inside. As she’s pondering about that, Jonah and Sam come back out to the observation deck to retrieve the backpack, and they see and meet Annie for the first time. Sam notices the guard getting antsy, as the observation floor is officially closed, and says, We better go, then holds out his hand to Annie and adds, shall we?
So, what is so great about that story. Nobody laid down their life for anyone else (except Jim Brown in The Dirty Dozen). Sam’s first wife died, but its was cancer and not voluntarily. Sam may have fallen in love again, but lots of ordinary people do that. But what about Jonah? I submit to you that he loved his dad so much, as he had his mom, that he would go to extreme measures to see his dad happy once again; to see him joined to another “mom,” but only to one he knew his dad could love—something Jonah had learned from his dad. Can we think of any greater love than that which drove Jonah?
The answer to the previous question is, Yes, recorded in John 15:13, as taught by Jesus. But can a child demonstrate that kind of love. Of course, Jonah wanted a new mom, but I believe this Hollywood love was directed more at his dad, expecting nothing in return. Now that is some kind of love for a kid! Where did it come from?
In spite of Adam’s sin and our fallen condition, there is a remnant of perfect love in all of us just waiting to break loose at the seems. It is distorted, but as we saw earlier, we have the chemistry for it. It drives us to extremes, whether it is distorted or not. For some it drives them the wrong way, into prostitution, homosexuality, murder, an so on, whether it is due to being unable to fulfill love in a natural way or not. But God’s love is innate in us, His now smeared image, waiting to come to age. For love is greater than all our sin, as is God’s grace (so the song goes). And is greater love because God is love, manifested in the act of Christ dying for all of our sins, once and for all.
“But when Christ had offered for all time a single sacrifice for sins, he sat down at the right hand of God, waiting from that time until his enemies should be made a footstool for his feet. For by a single offering he has perfected for all time those who are being sanctified.”
—Hebrews 10:12-14 (ESV)
Is Jonah’s love as great as this? No, but it is this love that is rooted in every Jonah that drives us to do extreme things, whether it is perverted or otherwise. 
The Path to Greater Love
I cannot love like that! Though the spark is within me, my flawed nature is going to inhibit and corrupts the love that is innate in me. Not only am I incapable of loving those around me like that, it is impossible for me to love God enough to turn to Him for help.
After Jesus announced to His disciples that He would be leaving them soon, He then gave them a statement of great encouragement: “And I will ask the Father, and He will give you another Counselor to be with you forever—the Spirit of Truth” (John 14:16–17)
The Greek word translated “Comforter” or “Counselor” (as found in John 14:16, 26; 15:26; and 16:7) is parakletos. The word in this form is usually taken to mean “one called to the side of another”; the word carries a secondary notion concerning the purpose of the calling alongside: to counsel or support the one who needs it. This Counselor, or Paraclete, is God the Holy Spirit, the third Person of the Trinity who has been “called to our side.” He is a personal being, and He indwells every believer.
During His earthly ministry, Jesus had guided, guarded, and taught His disciples; but in John 14-16, He is preparing to leave them. He promises that the Spirit of God would come to the disciples and dwell in them, taking the place of their Master's physical presence. Jesus called the Spirit “another Comforter”—another of the same kind. The Spirit of God is not different from the Son of God in essence, for both are God.
During the Old Testament age, the Spirit of God would come on people and then leave them. God’s Spirit departed from King Saul (1 Samuel 16:14; 18:12). David, when confessing his sin, asked that the Spirit not be taken from him (Psalm 51:11). But when the Spirit was given at Pentecost, He came to God’s people to remain with them forever. We may grieve the Holy Spirit, but He will not leave us. As Jesus said in Matthew 28:20, “Surely I am with you always, to the very end of the age.” How is He with us when He is in heaven, seated at the right hand of the Father? He is with us by His Spirit (the Helper—the Parakletos).
To have the Holy Spirit as our Paraclete is to have God Himself indwelling us as believers. The Spirit teaches us the Word and guides us into truth. He reminds us of what Jesus has taught so that we can depend on His Word in the difficult times of life. The Spirit works in us to give us His peace (John 14:27) and His joy (John 15:11). He comforts our hearts and minds in a troubled world. The power of the indwelling Paraclete gives us the ability to live by the Spirit and “not gratify the desires of the sinful flesh” (Galatians 5:16). The Spirit can then produce His fruit in our lives (Galatians 5:22–23) to the glory of God the Father. He is our Comforter, our Encourager, our Counselor, and our Advocate.
However, the specific Christian conception is lost in the comprehensiveness of the term. The following are given as the specific forms of activity of the Holy Spirit:
	to show them the things of Christ,
	to teach them things to come,
	to teach them all things,
	to quicken their memories for past teaching,
	to bear witness to Christ,
	to dwell in believers,
	other things shown in the context such as “greater works” than those of Christ (see John 14:16, 17),
	to convict of sin, of righteousness and judgment.
Yet, it is His activity related to love that make love greater in us. His love is what enables us to love.
“As the Father has loved me, so have I loved you. Now remain in my love. If you keep my commands, you will remain in my love, just as I have kept my Father’s commands and remain in his love. I have told you this so that my joy may be in you and that your joy may be complete. My command is this: Love each other as I have loved you. Greater love has no one than this: to lay down one’s life for one’s friends. You are my friends if you do what I command. I no longer call you servants, because a servant does not know his master’s business. Instead, I have called you friends, for everything that I learned from my Father I have made known to you. You did not choose me, but I chose you and appointed you so that you might go and bear fruit—fruit that will last—and so that whatever you ask in my name the Father will give you. This is my command: Love each other.
—John 15:11-17
Since the Spirit is doing the work that Christ begun with His incarnation, death and resurrection, the Spirit is doing the same as Christ did. He is performing the work describes in John 15:11-17. The Spirit chose me. I did not choose Him, but He chose me and appointed me so that I might go and bear fruit! As an enemy of God, I was incapable of choosing Him. 
The Will of Love
The Spirit caused me to choose Him! But what about free will? Could I have refused His love? I could certainly refuse it, but I was incapable of choosing it without the prompting of the Spirit. Yes I could have turned down His offer, like the apostate. The author of Hebrews again writes:
“There are those who have known the truth. They have received the gift from heaven. They have shared the Holy Spirit. They know how good the Word of God is. They know of the powers of the world to come. But if they turn away, they cannot be sorry for their sins and turn from them again. It is because they are nailing the Son of God on a cross again. They are holding Him up in shame in front of all people.”
—Hebrews 6:4-6 (NLV)
You can know the truth (a work of the Spirit) and not love God. You can receive the gift from heaven (Christ died for all) and not accept it. You can know how good the Word of God is (even demons know that) and not believe it. You can know the powers of the world to come and not embrace them. And you can grasp all of this and then turn away. And if you do turn away, you commit that sin, which many theologians speak of, that cannot be undone. The will of love is great, but you can reject it.
There are those who would have you believe that these verse are speaking of someone who loses salvation. On the contrary, there are too many other verse in Scripture that say otherwise. Moreover, Christ died for the salvation of all. You can refuse it, but you cannot lose it, and the love of God it the reason why. Once you genuinely choose to be a Christ follower you have gone beyond knowing and entered into a relationship that cannot be undone; you are no longer able to overcome the will of love. You may rebel, sin, stray, backslide, or perform some other verb indicating you are trying to run from love, but the will of love is faster than your feet, stronger than your power, and wiser than your foolishness. Once He has you, you are His forever.
The Greatest Story Ever Told (1965)
 
John Wane plays a Roman centurion at the crucifixion
A lone Centurion stands on the hill near the crucifixion: “Truly, this man was the son of God.” Spoken in the manner that only John Wayne could speak, the Centurion may have grasped the greatness of the crucified Messiah. Perhaps, even, he grasped His great love. Maybe he saw Jesus forgive the criminal hanging next to Him. Maybe he observed something between Mary and her Son. I do not really know if the “Duke” believed in Christ, but he said what he said very convincingly.
Of course, this was a movie about the story of Jesus (Max von Sydow). The cast was rounded out by Charlton Hesston (John the Baptist), Pat Boone (Angel at the Tomb), Angela Lansbury (Claudia), Richard Conte (Barabbas), Roddy McDowell (Matthew), Sidney Poitier (Simon of Cyrene), Tully Savalas (Pontius Pilate), and a lot more you would probably recognize. It is indeed the greatest story every told, about the greatest man who ever existed, and the greatest love that ever flowed. 
That great love flowed down from the hands and feet of the Savior on the cross, it flowed down the slopes of Calvary hill and into the Temple where the curtain was torn. It oozed from his head around the crown made of thorns. It flows over the church and the ghetto alike; in brothels in bars, in homes, without regard for status, riches or gain. It is a love so great it know not we aren’t the same. It flows on Muslim, Christian, and Buddhist, as well. It knows no bounds for it is the very thing that bounds the universe; that which binds all things.
He [Christ] is the image of the invisible God, the firstborn of all creation. For by him all things were created, in heaven and on earth, visible and invisible, whether thrones or dominions or rulers or authorities—all things were created through him and for him. And he is before all things, and in him all things hold [are bound] together.
—Colossians 1:15-17
Imagine a body without skin, or bones without ligaments, or a house built on the sand. They are not held together; they are not bound by strength. Yes, the greatest story ever told is about the story of Jesus, but it is more about His ministry of Love.
I do not know if director George Stevens realized he was engaged in making a movie about the greatest love to ever exist. And I do not know if John Wayne understood those few words from the script, but I do know that this great Love permeates it all. Truly, this man is Love!
And we are left with this axiom:
Love Axiom 15. Love is greater than anything imaginable
 
 
The Standard of Love
Romeo and Juliet; Anthony and Cleopatra; Rhett and Charlotte; all victims of tragic love. 
Up (2009)
It’s remarkable that ‘Up’ has managed to sneak into the all-time top 25 romantic movies on the strength of a single 10-minute sequence of an imaginary relationship, between imaginary people in an imaginary world.
 
Young Carl and Ellie picnicking at gazing at the sky
It could have been so cutesy, so saccharine: a geeky kid with coke-bottle glasses dreams of being an explorer. The girl down the street wants the same thing. They grow up, fall in love, years pass, and we see the highs and lows of their life together: marriage, family, work, sickness, eventually death – a tapestry of honest emotion and meaning (and this, lest we forget, is a children’s movie). The rest of ‘Up’ is ‘only’ hilarious and smart – but that opening is romance (and tragedy) itself.
The Story of Love
Our story starts in Genesis:
Then God said, “Let us make man[h] in our image, after our likeness. And let them have dominion over the fish of the sea and over the birds of the heavens and over the livestock and over all the earth and over every creeping thing that creeps on the earth.”
So God created man in his own image, in the image of God he created him;  male and female he created them.
And God blessed them. And God said to them, “Be fruitful and multiply and fill the earth and subdue it, and have dominion over the fish of the sea and over the birds of the heavens and over every living thing that moves on the earth.” And God said, “Behold, I have given you every plant yielding seed that is on the face of all the earth, and every tree with seed in its fruit. You shall have them for food. And to every beast of the earth and to every bird of the heavens and to everything that creeps on the earth, everything that has the breath of life, I have given every green plant for food.” And it was so. And God saw everything that he had made, and behold, it was very good. And there was evening and there was morning, the sixth day.
—Genesis 1:26-31
We Could Call this story, God and His Creation. The story of Adam’s disobedience is a tragedy. But here’s the thing: God knew Adam would be disobedient and created him anyway. What?
The all-knowing God of the universe, who transcends time and space, knew Adam would sin, but Love created him anyway. As tragic as it may sound, Love has to love, and have something to love. Love caused creation; it caused the flood; it caused Saul to be King and for David to be hunted; it caused Paul to be imprisoned in Rome; Love caused, nay Love volunteered to be crucified on a cross at to stream down Calvary hill to cover us all. I do not believe that love has any regard for tragedy:
	Love bears all things
	Love believes all things
	Love hopes all things
	Love endures all things
	Love never ends 
Boundless Love
1 Corinthians 13 says “love never ends.” If you turn in your English Bible, any version, and read John 1:1, you will probably see the words “In the beginning was…” John provides no context for which beginning he writes about. Is it the beginning of Christ’s ministry, or is it the time when John the Baptist immerses Jesus under the water and raises Him up? Is it His birth? Does it matter? I will answer the “does it matter” and to “when does it occur” questions shortly. 
The ambiguity of English is the reason the New Testament is written in Greek. God could have chosen Latin, Aramaic, Hebrew, Arabic, or other language for John to record his Gospel. But He chose Greek.
John 1:1 in the Greek Bible starts, “εν αρχη ην ο λογος”, or “en arche ̅ ho logos.” The Greek word arche ̅ means beginning. Literally translated, John 1:1 is, In beginning was the word. So do you think I am missing a definite article in from of beginning? I am not, nor do John write, en ha ̅ arche ̅, with the definite article “ha ̅ or the.” When a noun in Greek is used without a definite article, it is referred to in the absolute meaning of the word.
In the absolute beginning was the Word!
Love did not come after the tragedy. It came well before it, in the beginning of it all. It begins with God and Ends with God, and he never ends.
Love Axiom 16: Love has no bounds.
The Rose (1979)
The tragic life of a self-destructive female rock star, The Rose (Bette Midler), who struggles to deal with the constant pressures of her career and the demands of her ruthless business manager. Though a success, her rock and roll lifestyle of Drugs, Sex, and Rock and Roll and constant touring lead her to an inevitable breakdown. The film is loosely based on the life  of Janis Joplin.
 
Bette Midler portraying a Janis Joplin-like singer
Midler made popular a song wrote by Amanda McBroom, the Rose:
Some say love, it is a river, that drowns the tender reed 
Some say love, it is a razor, that leaves your soul to bleed 
Some say love, it is a hunger, an endless aching need 
I say love, it is a flower, and you, its only seed 

Its the heart afraid of breaking, that never learns to dance 
Its the dream afraid of waking, that never takes a chance 
Its the one that won't be taking, that cannot seem to give 
It's the one afraid of dying, that never learns to live 

When the night has been too lonely and the road has been too long 
And you think that love is only for the lucky and the strong 
Just remember in the winter, far beneath the bitter snow 
Lies the seed, that with the sun's love in the spring becomes the rose.
John the Apostle simply stated, Love is God (technically he said it the other way around, but who’s being technical?). 
“Beloved, let us love one another, for love is from God; and everyone who loves is born of God and knows God. The one who does not love does not know God, for God is love.”
—1 John 4:7-8
The Gold Standard
What contrasts Midler’s description of love? It’s Corinthians 13, of course. But let’s elaborate on it a little with an Old Testament narrative. 
“When the Lord first spoke through Hosea, the Lord said to Hosea, “Go, take to yourself a wife of whoredom and have children of whoredom, for the land commits great whoredom by forsaking the Lord.” So he went and took Gomer, the daughter of Diblaim, and she conceived and bore him a son.”
—Hosea 1:2-3
What manner of man would go through what Hosea, an Old Testament profit, went through for the sake of love. In the book of Hosea, God paints a picture of His love of Israel and the harlot nation it had become. Could you do what Hosea was asked to do?
“ And the Lord said to me, ‘Go again, love a woman who is loved by another man and is an adulteress, even as the Lord loves the children of Israel, though they turn to other gods and love cakes of raisins.’”
—Hosea 3:2
But God never gave up on Israel—or His creation. Although the story of God and Israel may seem tragic, He see Israel in a future yet to be revealed, as prophesied by Hosea in part and fully by John, the Apostle.
“And in that day, declares the Lord, you will call me ‘My Husband,’ and no longer will you call me ‘My Baal.’ For I will remove the names of the Baals from her mouth, and they shall be remembered by name no more. And I will make for them a covenant on that day with the beasts of the field, the birds of the heavens, and the creeping things of the ground. And I will abolish[f] the bow, the sword, and war from the land, and I will make you lie down in safety. And I will betroth you to me forever. I will betroth you to me in righteousness and in justice, in steadfast love and in mercy. I will betroth you to me in faithfulness. And you shall know the Lord.”
—Hosea 2:16-20
The book of Hosea does not end well. Had it so ended, there would have been no need for God to persist in reconcile His creation and His old covenant would have sufficed. But Love “never fails”; it continues to pursue the object of its love. Love does not give up—that’s the standard.
“When Israel was a child, I loved him,
    and out of Egypt I called my son.
The more they were called,
    the more they went away;
they kept sacrificing to the Baals
    and burning offerings to idols.
Yet it was I who taught Ephraim to walk;
    I took them up by their arms,
    but they did not know that I healed them.
I led them with cords of kindness,
    with the bands of love,
and I became to them as one who eases the yoke on their jaws,
    and I bent down to them and fed them.”
—Hosea 11:1-4 (ESV)
Now let’s go back to the movies.
The Return of the King (2003)
In this, the third book of Tolkien’s saga of Middle Earth, Frodo Baggins (Elijah Wood) and his companion, Samwise Gamgee (Sean Astin), are at the end of their food and their wits. At the base of Mount Doom, the journey now seems impossible. 
 
Samwise: [Both are overcome by exhaustion] Do you remember the Shire, Mr. Frodo? It'll be spring soon. And the orchards will be in blossom. And the birds will be nesting in the hazel thicket. And they'll be sowing the summer barley in the lower fields... and eating the first of the strawberries with cream. Do you remember the taste of strawberries?
Frodo: No, Sam. I can't recall the taste of food... nor the sound of water... nor the touch of grass. I'm... naked in the dark, with nothing, no veil... between me... and the wheel of fire! I can see him... with my waking eyes!
Samwise: Then let us be rid of it... [the ring] once and for all! Come on, Mr. Frodo. I can't carry it for you... but I can carry you!
And so the fate of Middle Earth rest with two tiny Hobbits, or more precisely, on the shoulders of Samwise Gamgee.
I have heard it said that extreme times call from extreme measures. Stopping to think about it, love is extreme regardless of the time or setting. Whether it is Hosea’s extreme acceptance of a harlot, Samwise’s great devotion to his friend, or Christ’s ultimate sacrifice at Calvary, love is extreme. Here’s an axiom:
Love Axiom 17: Love is willing to go to extremes to express itself. 
The Tragedy of Love
I could have called this chapter the “Songs of Love”, but as I listened to them, the tragedy of love in these songs made an impression on me. The truth of Love does not find its way into most songs of love; but the truth of secular love’s shortfall does.
True Detective (2016)
Given HBO’s True Detective’s penchant for teasing out legendary tales, it’s fitting that a king (or, rather, the shadow of one) hovers over the second season’s third episode. Tue Detective is an anthology series in which police investigations unearth the personal and professional secrets of those involved, both within and outside the law.
Season two’s third episode opens with what appears to be an Elvis impersonator (played by Jake La Botz) decked out in a shimmering powder-blue suit. He’s on his knees, pomaded hair slicked back, hamming it up onstage at Ray Velcoro’s local dive bar, not by lip-synching an Elvis tune but “The Rose,” a Conway Twitty cover first made famous by Midler’s portrayal the Joplin-like singer.
 
Ray and his father in the dinner with an Elvis impersonator
Only two people are present to witness this spectacle: Ray and a man sitting across from him. We later learn it’s his father, with whom he has a fraught relationship. To wit: “You lacked grit,” Ray's father grumbles to his son, whose chest currently spurts with true blood from the two riot shells he was shot with in episode two’s nail-biting conclusion. Behind them, pseudo-Elvis croons: “Some say love, it is a razor / That leaves your soul to bleed.” Ray then is roused from the dead — from, the subconscious — just as the song hums to a finish on a nearby radio. While this ephemeral dream-sequence-cum-near-death-vision is a feverish love letter to David Lynch — the Elvis impersonator is bathed in blue light onstage, not unlike La Llorona de Los Angeles’s uncanny performance in Mulholland Drive, and the scene plucks at Dale Cooper’s visit from a clairvoyant giant after being shot in Twin Peaks — “The Rose” is admittedly an unusual choice for this hard-boiled series.
Yet grappling with the prickly parts of love is what “The Rose” is all about. The song’s seeds can be traced back to a quiet afternoon in the 1970s, when budding songwriter Amanda McBroom was gunning down the freeway. On her website, McBroom recalls hearing Leo Sayer’s version of Danny O’Keefe’s “Magdalena” come on the radio. One couplet stuck her like a thorn: “Your love is like a razor / My heart is just a scar.” She then sped home to pen down what love meant to her because she didn’t agree with the idea that it was that cutting. “The song was automatic writing. It is my philosophy,” McBroom recently told The Wall Street Journal. From that chance moment, “The Rose” bloomed.
At the insistence of her musician friend Michele Brourman, who heard of an ambitious film project percolating (The Rose, loosely based on the life of Janis Joplin), McBroom submitted the song to producers. They weren’t that keen on “The Rose,” but then-music supervisor Paul A. Rothchild offered it up for consideration on The Rose’s soundtrack anyhow. Midler selected it and immortalized the song in her role as Mary “Rose” Foster, an established blues-rock legend bristling against the pressures of fame in Mark Rydell’s eponymous 1979 film. It was The Rose (Midler’s first film role) that established her as a performer, encompassing the vulnerable and vulgar in equal, elegant measure. This was in no small part due to the film’s elongated concert scenes and her dulcet version of “The Rose,” which plays under the end credits.
Four years later, the gristly Conway Twitty released his cover of “The Rose,” which charted at No. 1 on the country charts upon its 1983 release. At that point, the country star already boasted 29 No. 1 singles on the Billboard country charts, and would have 20 more before his 1993 death. The song has since evolved into a sweet (if campy) classic, covered by the likes of the Irish boy-band Westlife even to Christopher Maloney, a hopeful competing for a spot on the U.K. singing showdown The X-Factor.
 
Conway Twitty performing live
And “The Rose” is arguably True Detective’s most self-aware musical selection thus far. It’s unabashedly a love song, but love seldom pays the town of Vinci a visit. No one particularly loves their jobs, themselves, or life, for that matter. Ani ends her courtship with a police officer for inexplicable reasons. Paul meets up with a fellow soldier buddy, and while it’s clear the two men were previously engaged in more than combat together, Paul refuses to acknowledge it and hides behind a self-loathing mug instead.
Ray is the sole character who embraces love in all its barbed forms. He admits that his father made him nervous, yet still scores him pot to help with his health issues. A telling moment happens when Ray checks in with the doctor after the shooting and discovers his liver’s redlining. “Do you want to live?” the doctor suddenly asks him. He’s rendered silent, unsure himself. After all, the sole person he loves in this world, his son, Chad, might be taken away from him soon. So what’s there to live for if not for the one you love? Love isn’t tender in True Detective, as Conway might plead otherwise, but rather an aching need the characters consciously ignore again and again.
 
Ray and son in True Detective, Season 2
Yet it’s the final hopeful lines of “The Rose” that prove to be the most evocative: “Just remember in the winter / Far beneath the bitter snows / Lies the seed that with the sun’s love / In the spring becomes the rose.” It’s no coincidence that Vinci’s motto is “Towards tomorrow.” The highway shots of cars thumping across California’s veins, trickling like blood running through vessels, hint at the desire for escape to a rosier elsewhere. Everyone is attempting to lurch forward in True Detective, whether it’s Frank constantly eschewing the big, bad old days he left behind (and inches closer to falling into once again), or Paul quarantining the past, despite clouding his potential identity as a closeted gay man.
Heck, the detectives don’t even seem made for these times at all — except Ani, who unapologetically continues to puff at an e-cigarette much to Ray and Paul’s dismay. But the residents of Vinci are also living recklessly, trying to forget tomorrow. When asked by his wife Jordan if he wants to talk about what’s aching him, Frank murmurs: “Maybe tomorrow.” So whether you’re of the mind that love is a cutting razor or even a rose, one thing is certain: It hurts.
Love Hurts
We cannot find more hurt in love than we can in the music of our time. So sit back and enjoy some great hurt songs.
“Love Hurts” – Nazareth
Some fools think of happiness
Blissfulness, togetherness
Some fools fool themselves I guess
They're not foolin' me
I know it isn't true, I know it isn't true
Love is just a lie
Made to make you blue
Love hurts......ooh, ooh love hurts
ooh, ooh love hurts
Ouch! It can. Do you think that our Lord did not hurt? Somewhere I read “Jesus wept.” (John 11:35) I assure you that if there had been any other way to reconcile man unto Himself, God would have gone that route. Yet he suffered the pain of death and separation, knowing that it would hurt and hurt badly.
Love Axiom 18: Love hurts but it also heals.
Cold Cold Heart
I am amazed how many young people are authorities on love. Past, present, and future, the Pop or Country song writer will always have much greater insight into love than I could possibly imagine, or at least the world seems to think so. I thank Conway Twitty for having the courage to tell the truth in “I Don’t Know a Thing About Love.”
I talk to the man in the moon.
I said, “Sir, is she coming back soon?”
He smiled and he stated,
“Son, I'm over-rated,
I've had to much credit in those old love tunes.
I don't know a thing about love,
I just kind of hang here above.
I just watch from the sky,
Will love grow or will it die?
I don't know a thing about love.”
These artist performed some amazing and memorable songs, but otherwise, many artists got Love all wrong:
	“I Will Always Love You” by Whitney Houston
	“When a Man Loves a Woman” by Percy Sledge
	“Endless Love” by Diana Ross and Lionel Richie
	“The Power of Love” by Celine Dion
	“I Want to Know What Love Is” by Foreigner
	“Crazy For You” by Madonna
	“I Love You Always Forever” by Donna Lewis
	“I Keep on Lovin' You” by Reba McIntyre
	“I Cross My Heart” by George Strait
	“Crazy Little Thing Called Love” by Queen
	“When You Love a Woman” by Journey
	“True Love Waits” by Radiohead
	“Whole Lotta Love” by Led Zeppelin
	“Love of My Life” by Queen
	“Is This Love?” by Whitesnake
	“Make You Feel My Love” by Adele
	“We Found Love” by Rihanna featuring Calvin Harris
	“Love Song” by Sara Bareilles
	“Crazy In Love” by Beyonce featuring Jay-Z
	“Bleeding Love” by Leona Lewis
	“Love Story” by Taylor Swift
	“The Power of Love” by Celine Dion
	“I Just Can't Stop Loving You” by Michael Jackson
	Love Is A Battlefield - Pat Benatar
	Love Don't Live Here Anymore - City And Color
Linda Ronstadt wants to know, When Will I be Loved:
I've been cheated, been mistreated
When will I be loved
I've been put down, I've been pushed 'round
When will I be loved
When I find a new man that I want for mine
Always breaks my heart in two, it happens every time
I've been made blue, I've been lied to
When will I be loved …
Johnny Cash described love as A Ring of Fire:
Love is a burnin' thing
And it makes a fiery ring
Bound by wild desire
I fell into a ring of fire
John the Apostle simply stated, Love is God (technically he said it the other way around, but who’s being technical?). 
“Beloved, let us love one another, for love is from God; and everyone who loves is born of God and knows God. The one who does not love does not know God, for God is love.”
—1 John 4:7-8
“Tears in Heaven” – Eric Clapton  
 
Arguably one of the greatest guitarist of all time, Eric Clapton, performing live
Would you know my name
If I saw you in heaven?
Would it be the same
If I saw you in heaven?
I must be strong
And carry on
'Cause I know I don't belong
Here in heaven
Clapton wrote this one after losing his son. I am sure Nazareth thought they new “Love Hurts,” but Eric did know. If there is one thing that the music artist got right it is “love can hurt”, even though they may have arrived at the conclusion for the wrong reason. Tragically, Clapton was looking the honest truth about love dead on in the face, but it did not move him. I would venture to say that none of us belong in heaven, but Christ did what it takes to get us there nonetheless.
Love Axiom 19: Because of Love, we all belong in heaven.
“When She Loved Me” – Sarah McLachlan
 
The “When She Loved Me” scene in Toy Story 2
So the years went by.
I stayed the same
but she began to drift away
I was left alone.
Still I waited for the day
when she'd say “I will always love you.” 
I can visualize the animated, disillusioned, heart-broken Jesse sitting on the window sill with a sad looking Woody looking on. Yet, it should not surprise Disney that secular love never lasts.
 “Cat’s In The Cradle” – Harry Chapin  
 
Harry Chapin performing live
I've long since retired, my son's moved away
I called him up just the other day
I said, “I'd like to see you if you don't mind”
He said, “I'd love to, Dad, if I can find the time
You see my new job's a hassle and the kids have the flu
But it's sure nice talking to you, Dad
It's been sure nice talking to you”
And as I hung up the phone it occurred to me
He'd grown up just like me
My boy was just like me
And the cat's in the cradle and the silver spoon
Little boy blue and the man in the moon
When you comin' home son
I don't know when, but we'll get together then, Dad
We're gonna have a good time then
Chapin penned one of my favorite songs, when I was a young man. I would not have been surprised if he had written about my dad, and I am sure that some of you would claim this mantra for yourselves. The sad truth is it probably fits some of us, as well.
 “Crying” – Roy Orbison  
I thought that I was over you
But it's true, so true
I love you even more
Than I did before
But, darling, what can I do?
For you don't love me
And I'll always be crying over you
Crying over you
Yes, now you're gone
And from this moment on
I'll be crying, crying
Crying, crying
Yeah, crying, crying
Over you
As if Roy did not induce enough tears with this doozy, Cash had to follow it with “Cry, Cry, Cry.” I am not sure that they had that many tears between them. If they had, however, added Jesus’s tears, we would have witnessed a flood. Though not biblical, imagine God crying over His creation and washing the ark away in their wake.
 “Love Will Tear Us Apart” – Joy Division  
 
The Joy Division band
You cry out in your sleep,
All my failings exposed.
And there's a taste in my mouth,
As desperation takes hold.
Just that something so good
Just can't function no more.
But love, love will tear us apart again.
Love, love will tear us apart again.
In a fashion, I think these guys are right, but not about real love. Real love does not tear apart; it builds up. Real love does not destroy; it builds up. If we can substitute “Love” for any instance of God—and we can—then we have, for example: 
“In the beginning Love created the heavens and the earth, and the earth was formless and void [like quantum mass]; and Love hovered over the face of the deep. Then Love said, “let there be Light…”
—Genesis 1:1-3
And so,
“He is the image of the invisible [Love], the firstborn of all creation. For by [Love] all things were created, in heaven and on earth, visible and invisible, whether thrones or dominions or rulers or authorities—all things were created through [Love] and for [Love] And [Love] is before all things, and in him all things hold together. And [Love] is the head of the body, the church. [Love] is the beginning, the firstborn from the dead, that in everything he might be preeminent. For in [Love] all the fullness of God was pleased to dwell, and through [Love] to reconcile to himself all things, whether on earth or in heaven, making peace by the blood of his cross.”
—Colossians 1:15-20
He does not tear apart; for in Love, “all things hold together.”
 “He Stopped Loving Her Today” – George Jones
You know, she came to see him one last time
Oh, and we all wondered if she would
And it kept running through my mind
This time he's over her for good
He stopped loving her today
They placed a wreath upon his door
And soon they'll carry him away
He stopped loving her today
George paints a grim picture of a man who stopped loving a woman who had stopped loving—the man’s cessation was permanent. God, the Son, did not stop loving us in death. In fact, He loved us so much, He rose from the dead and reconciled us to God.
“Hurt” – Johnny Cash
 
A classic picture of Johnny Cash,” The Man in Black”
“I cried the first time I saw it,” said producer Rick Rubin. “If you were move to that kind of emotion in the course of a two-hour movie, it would be a great accomplishment. To do it in a four-minute music video is shocking.”
The song became a heart-wrenching music video, that spoke about the transience of life, the gracelessness of death, the Ozymandias crumbling of an oeuvre and the decline of a genre, an era and an attitude.
What have I become 
My sweetest friend 
Everyone I know goes away 
In the end 
And you could have it all 
My empire of dirt 
I will let you down 
I will make you hurt 
If I could start again 
A million miles away 
I would keep myself 
I would find a way
Johnny Cash lived a tragic life of behavior characterized by drug abuse, drinking, smoking and womanizing. Yet, Cash, once divorced, found his way through June Carter Cash. June would die three months after the release of “Hurt’” and Johnny would follow seven months later. But, he did finally get a glimpse of real love, and a loving woman that made him forget his “Folsom Prison” blues. (Hooton, 2015)
Cash began his country career, shortly after another great one tragically ended his. Although Johnny began tragically, he found peace in the end, though some would say he died for want of June.  Hank Williams was not so fortunate.
Tragic Love
If you want to know what love is, don’t turn to country music, at least not to Hank Williams. A insightful song written by Hank Williams’ Junior excuses his drinking, smoking, and womanizing behavior as “Family Tradition.” Hank Junior is just telling the truth. Tragically dying at age 29, Hank Williams probably had the greatest influence on Country music that nay other performer in its history. The surprising Williams did not get accepted by the Grand Ole Opry until June 1949—one month after the birth of Hank Williams, Jr.—and was dismissed in August of 1952 due to his dependency on alcohol. Labeled the King of Country Music, Williams died of heart failure on Thursday January 1, 1953—perhaps it was broken.
 
Williams recording in WSM radio studios in 1946
I saw the Light (2015)
Tom Hiddleston’s portrayal of Williams in “I saw the Light” (2015) brought this home to me. I started writing this chapter before I saw the movie, subtitles “Love Hurts” and “Cold Cold Heart”. I chose to leave that alone when I added Williams’s (or Hiddleston’s) rendition of “Cold Cold Heart”. In a smoke-lit room, under a single spotlight, Hiddleston begins singing without accompaniment. The sad shrill of the steal guitar raps up the scene. It is enough to make your heart hurt—it made mine do so.
 
Tom Hiddleston, as Hank Williams, in “I Saw the Light” (2015)
Hank Williams – “Cold Cold Heart”
I tried so hard my dear to show that you're my every dream
Yet you're afraid each thing I do is just some evil scheme
A memory from your lonesome past keeps us so far apart
Why can't you free your doubtful mind, and melt your cold cold heart
Another love before my time made your heart sad and blue
And so my heart is paying now for things I didn't do
In anger unkind words are said that make the teardrops start
Why can't you free your doubtful mind, and melt your cold cold heart
You'll never know how much it hurts to see you sit and cry
You know you need and want my love yet you're afraid to try
Why do you run and hide from lies, to try it just ain't smart
Why can't I free your doubtful mind, and melt your cold cold heart
There was a time when I believed that you belonged to me
But now I know your heart is shackled to a memory
The more I learn to care for you, the more we drift apart
Why can't I free your doubtful mind, and melt your cold cold heart?
When Williams departed for his fateful trip to Municipal Auditorium in Charleston, West Virginia, on December 1st, 1952, he may have been the loneliest person on the planet.  He never knew Love.
Hank Williams – “I’m So Lonesome I Could Cry”
Hear that lonesome whippoorwill,
He sounds too blue to fly.
The midnight train is whining low,
I'm so lonesome I could cry.
I've never seen a night so long
When time goes crawling by.
The moon just went behind the clouds
To hide its face and cry.
Did you ever see a robin weep,
When leaves begin to die
That means he's lost the will to live,
I'm so lonesome I could cry.
The silence of a falling star
Lights up a purple sky.
And as I wonder where you are
I'm so lonesome I could cry.
Although Williams released “I saw the Light” in 1948, it does not appear that he really grasped the Gospel, making his demise more tragic.
True Love (Love Song) – Third Day 
 
Mac Powell and Third Day performing live
I've heard it said that a man would climb a mountain
Just to be with the one he loves
How many times has he broken that promise
It has never been done.
I've never climbed the highest mountain
But I walked the hill of Calvary
[Chorus:]
Just to be with you, I'd do anything
There's no price I would not pay
Just to be with you, I'd give anything
I would give my life away.
I've heard it said that a man would swim the ocean
Just to be with the one he loves
How may times has he broken that promise
It can never be done
I've never swam the deepest ocean
But I walked upon the raging sea
 [Repeat chorus]
 [Bridge]
I know that you don't understand 
the fullness of My love
How I died upon the cross for your sins
And I know that you don't realize
how much that I gave you
But I promise, I would do it all again.
Just to be with you, I've done everything
There's no price I did not pay
Just to be with you, I gave everything
Yes, I gave my life away.
Mac and his boys got it right. But how could they not when they are singing about our Lord? Real love gives everything for the object of its love. Nothing is withheld! Who can really love like this? I know I am not capable and I would venture to say hat neither is Mac Powell nor Mark Lee (Third Day founders). Yet this Christian rock band from Marietta, Georgia, nailed the concept as accurately as its subject was nailed to a cross. “Yes” says Christ, “I gave my life away;” “Just to be with you.” Wow!
Love Axiom 20: Love continuously pursues the object of its love.
Love Above All
Tragic as it may appear to the Cinema and Country Music, love is not tragic at all. In fact it is the only cure for tragedy. It “bears all things, believes all things, hopes all things, endures all things.” (1 Corinthians, 13:7)
Above All, Michael W. Smith gets it. In Love, Christ took the fall. He though of me, above all:
Above all powers
Above all kings
Above all nature and all created things
Above all wisdom and all the ways of man
You were here before the world began
Above all kingdoms
Above all thrones
Above all wonders the world has ever known
Above all wealth and treasures of the earth
There's no way to measure what you're worth
Crucified
Laid behind the stone
You lived to die
Rejected and alone
Like a rose trampled on the ground
You took the fall
And thought of me
Above all
Yes, although I tragically had no thought of Him, he thought of me, and He took my sin, my fall. And while I was still an enemy to He died for my tragic life of sin. His love can raise and does raise us from our dead lives, from our crippled views of love, from our terminally sick souls of darkness, and restore us, His bride unto Himself. Love is the reason we exist; the reason we were created. 
 
The Enemy of Love

Then Jesus was led up by the Spirit into the wilderness to be tempted by the devil. And after fasting forty days and forty nights, he was hungry. And the tempter came and said to him, “If you are the Son of God, command these stones to become loaves of bread.” 4 But he answered, “It is written,
“‘Man shall not live by bread alone, but by every word that comes from the mouth of God.’”
Then the devil took him to the holy city and set him on the pinnacle of the temple and said to him, “If you are the Son of God, throw yourself down, for it is written,
“‘He will command his angels concerning you,’ and ‘On their hands they will bear you up, lest you strike your foot against a stone.’”
Jesus said to him, “Again it is written, ‘You shall not put the Lord your God to the test.’” Again, the devil took him to a very high mountain and showed him all the kingdoms of the world and their glory. And he said to him, “All these I will give you, if you will fall down and worship me.” Then Jesus said to him, “Be gone, Satan! For it is written,
“‘You shall worship the Lord your God and him only shall you serve.’”
Then the devil left him, and behold, angels came and were ministering to him.
—Matthew 4:1-11
The Half-Truth of Love
When dealing with Jesus—and Christians, in general—Lucifer uses truth! He quoted Scripture to Christ in the wilderness; yet, he took it out of context. But Love (Christ) could see through the half-truths.
Satan has two effective tools for thwarting our relationship with Love: Lies and Fear. We touched on Fear in “The Science of Love.” Her I will address the lies of the enemy. Some of the following material may require censoring for younger readers.
Pornographic Love
A Barna survey reveals that overall, 64 percent of American men reported that they view porn at least monthly and 18 percent of all men said they are either addicted or unsure if they’re dependent upon smut; this proportion jumped to 33 percent for men between the ages of 18 and 30.
“You don't need to be of the Mary Whitehouse conservative persuasion to feel that something has gone catastrophically awry here.” (Pearson, 2015)
—a teenage girl 
Proven Men Ministries founder Joel Hesch, who sponsored the survey, said the results prove that there’s an epidemic of sorts unfolding, with porn draining peoples’ “time, energy and resources” if addiction is left unchecked.
“What we are seeing can almost be described as epidemic,” he said in a press release. “Viewing pornography can quickly turn into a very real addiction. Just like drug or alcohol use, what starts off as a seemingly innocent or fun act can quickly spiral out of control.” (Hesch, 2014)
In “Sex Before Kissing: 15-Year-Old Girls Dealing With Porn Addicted Boys,” the writer says,
“Pornography is molding and conditioning the sexual behaviors and attitudes of boys, and girls are being left without the resources to deal with these porn-saturated boys.” (Reist, 2016)
In the survey report, entitled “Don’t send me that pic,” participants reported that online sexual abuse and harassment were becoming a normal part of their everyday interactions. Girls as you as seventh-graders are increasingly seeking help on what to do about requests for naked images. Receiving texts like “send me a picture of your [boobs]” is an almost daily occurrence for many young girls. The girl asks: “How do I say no without hurting his feelings?”
Girls describe being groped in the school yard, and being routinely sexually harassed at school or on the school bus on the way home. They are saying that boys act like they are entitled to girls’ bodies, like girls are only there to pleasure them. It is partially true what defenders of porn often say, porn does provide sex education—but not in the way they think. It teaches middle school boys that women and girls are there for his pleasure and that they are always up for sex. To them, no just means persuade me.
In “How online porn is warping the behavior of boys with girls,” the director of a domestic violence center on the Gold Coast states:
“In the past few years we have had a huge increase in intimate partner rape of women from 14 to 80+. The biggest common denominator is consumption of porn by the offender. With offenders not able to differentiate between fantasy and reality, believing women are ‘up for it’ 24/7, ascribing to the myth that ‘no means yes and yes means anal,’ oblivious to injuries caused and never ever considering consent. We have seen a huge increase in deprivation of liberty, physical injuries, torture, drugging, filming and sharing footage without consent.” (Pearson, 2015)
In “The Impact of Internet Pornography on Adolescents: A Review of the Research,” the authors examined the impact of Internet pornography on sexual attitudes, beliefs, behaviors, and sexual aggression. The authors also discuss the literature related to the influence of sexually explicit Internet material on self-concept, body image, social development, as well as the expanding body of research on adolescent brain function and physical development. (Owens, Behun, Manning, & Reid, 2012)
They found that adolescent consumption of internet porn was linked to attitudinal changes, including acceptance of male dominance and female submission as the primary sexual paradigm, with women viewed as “sexual playthings eager to fulfill male sexual desires.” The authors found that “adolescents who are intentionally exposed to violent sexually explicit material were six times more likely to be sexually aggressive than those who were not exposed.” (Owens, Behun, Manning, & Reid, 2012)
In “Pornography and the Male Sexual Script: An Analysis of Consumption and Sexual Relations,” researchers surveyed 487 college men (ages 18–29 years) in the United States to compare their rate of pornography use with sexual preferences and concerns. Results showed the more pornography a man watches, the more likely he was to use it during sex, request particular pornographic sex acts of his partner, deliberately conjure images of pornography during sex to maintain arousal, and have concerns over his own sexual performance and body image. Further, higher pornography use was negatively associated with enjoying sexually intimate behaviors with a partner. The authors stated:
“Online mainstream pornography overwhelmingly centered on acts of violence and degradation toward women, the sexual behaviors exemplified in pornography skew away from intimacy and tenderness and typify patriarchal constructions of masculinity and femininity.” (Sun, Bridges, Johnson, & Ezzell, 2016)
This stands contrary to love. Love is not violent! It is tender and intimate; it seeks after the well-being of its object with no regard for itself. Recall its description in Corinthians 13. Men and boys affected by pornography will never know real Love, and they will never be able to give it, without repentance. Unless something breaks the chains of pornography, men are destined to be enslaved to it. Here’s an axiom:
Love Axiom 21: Love is stronger than any chains and can break the strongest bonds
Self-esteem and Love
“Low self-esteem among girls and young women has reached a crisis level,” said Dr. Ann Kearney-Cooke, Ph.D., a psychologist and self-esteem expert who collaborated on Real Girls, Real Pressure. “The new report from Dove confirms the importance of healthy self-esteem and the dangerous consequences that can arise when hang-ups about looks, academics and popularity erode a girl's sense of self-worth and self-acceptance.”
In “11 Facts About Teens and Self Esteem,” the researcher list the following: (Dosomething.org, 2014)
	Low self-esteem is a thinking disorder in which an individual views him/herself as inadequate, unlovable, and/or incompetent. Once formed, this negative view permeates every thought, producing faulty assumptions and ongoing self-defeating behavior.
	Among high school students, 44% of girls and 15% of guys are attempting to lose weight.
	Over 70% of girls age 15 to 17 avoid normal daily activities, such as attending school, when they feel bad about their looks. Brighten someone’s day by posting encouraging messages on your school’s bathroom mirrors. Sign up for Mirror Messages.
	More than 40% of boys in middle school and high school regularly exercise with the goal of increasing muscle mass.
	75% of girls with low self-esteem reported engaging in negative activities like cutting, bullying, smoking, drinking, or disordered eating. This compares to 25% of girls with high self-esteem.
	About 20% of teens will experience depression before they reach adulthood.
	Teen girls that have a negative view of themselves are 4 times more likely to take part in activities with boys that they've ended up regretting later.
	The top wish among all teen girls is for their parents to communicate better with them. This includes frequent and more open conversations.
	38% of boys in middle school and high school reported using protein supplements and nearly 6% admitted to experimenting with steroids.
	7 in 10 girls believe that they are not good enough or don’t measure up in some way, including their looks, performance in school and relationships with friends and family members.
	A girl’s self-esteem is more strongly related to how she views her own body shape and body weight, than how much she actually weighs.
In “Low Self-Esteem at Crisis Levels for Girls,” Jim Liebelt says self-esteem has become a national crisis. Liebelt writes that “The majority of girls (seven in ten) feel they do not measure up in some way including their looks, performance in school and relationships. Most disturbing is that girls with low self-esteem are engaging in harmful and destructive behavior that can leave a lasting imprint on their lives.”  (Liebelt, 2008)
A new study, “Real Girls, Real Pressure: A National Report on the State of Self-Esteem,” conducted with girls between eight and 17 years of age reported these findings:
	75 percent of girls with low self-esteem reported engaging in negative and potentially harmful activities, such as disordered eating, cutting, bullying, smoking or drinking, when feeling badly about themselves -- compared with 25 percent of girls with high self-esteem.
	61 percent of teen girls with low self-esteem admit to talking badly about themselves. (Compared to 15 percent of girls with high self-esteem.)
	25 percent of teen girls with low self-esteem resort to injuring themselves on purpose or cutting when feeling badly about themselves. (Compared to 4 percent of girls with high self-esteem.)
	25 percent of teen girls with low self-esteem practice disordered eating, such as starving themselves, refusing to eat, or over-eating and throwing up, when feeling badly about themselves.(Compared to 7 percent of girls with high self-esteem.)
Wrecking Love
Video-game character Wreck-It Ralph (voice of John C. Reilly), whose chief talent is breaking things, feels like a loser; his fellow characters don't invite them to their parties. Embarking on a saga aimed at gaining their respect, Ralph gains self-respect unexpectedly. 
 
Ralph in bad-guy group therapy
In the Arcade, people don’t love bad guys but they do love heroes so when a modern, first-person shooter game arrives featuring tough-as-nails Sergeant Calhoun (voice of Jane Lynch), Ralph sees it as his ticket to heroism and happiness. He sneaks into the game with a simple plan: win a medal, but soon wrecks everything and accidentally unleashes a deadly enemy that threatens every game in the arcade. Ralph's only hope is Vanellope von Schweetz (voice of Sarah Silverman), a young troublemaking glitch from a candy-coated cart racing game who might just be the one to teach Ralph what it means to be a Good Guy. But will he realize he is good enough to become a hero before it's "Game Over" for the entire arcade?
 
Ralph climbing a Sugarland tree meets Vanellope
Like young people today, Ralf went through extreme measures to battle his self-esteem issue. But is self—esteem Biblical? No, it is not.
Christ-esteem
We draw everything we need from Christ. David, who had more pressing issues than his esteem wrote:
For you formed my inward parts;
you knitted me together in my mother's womb.
I praise you, for I am fearfully and wonderfully made.
Wonderful are your works;
my soul knows it very well.
My frame was not hidden from you,
when I was being made in secret,
intricately woven in the depths of the earth.
Your eyes saw my unformed substance;
in your book were written, every one of them,
the days that were formed for me,
when as yet there was none of them.
—Psalm 139:13-16 (ESV)
You are “fearfully and wonderfully made.” You have no need of anything else. We look for fulfillment in the lies that Satan tells, self-esteem and pornography, but they can never complete us. Completion comes from Christ.
Don’t let anyone capture you with empty philosophies and high-sounding nonsense that come from human thinking and from the spiritual powers[a] of this world, rather than from Christ. For in Christ lives all the fullness of God in a human body. So you also are complete through your union with Christ, who is the head over every ruler and authority. 
—Colossian 2:8-10 (NLT)
Here’s an axiom:
Love Axiom 22: Love’s esteem can cover all inadequacies
The Truth of Love
There is just one thing that can overcome lies and that is the truth contained in God’s word. When Satan rattled off Scripture out of context, Jesus merely provided the context: “The Bible say this.” “Yes, but it adds this.” Satan just leaves enough out of Scripture to make it a lie. Jesus has this to say:
For you are the children of your father the devil, and you love to do the evil things he does. He was a murderer from the beginning. He has always hated the truth, because there is no truth in him. When he lies, it is consistent with his character; for he is a liar and the father of lies.
—John 8:44
There are three lessons we can learn about truth to counter the lies thrown at us by Satan.
The Bible is the Word of Truth
Psalm 119:160 The sum of your word is truth, and every one of your righteous rules endures forever.
Daniel 10:21 But I will tell you what is inscribed in the book of truth: there is none who contends by my side against these except Michael, 
John 17:17 Sanctify them in the truth; your word is truth.
Ephesians 1:13-14 In him you also, when you heard the word of truth, the gospel of your salvation, and believed in him, were sealed with the promised Holy Spirit, who is the guarantee of our inheritance until we acquire possession of it, to the praise of his glory.
James 1:18 Of his own will he brought us forth by the word of truth, that we should be a kind of first fruits of his creatures.
God Leads in Truth
Job 34:12 Of a truth, God will not do wickedly, and the Almighty will not pervert justice.
Psalm 25:5 Lead me in your truth and teach me, for you are the God of my salvation; for you I wait all the day long.
Psalm 43:3 Send out your light and your truth; let them lead me; let them bring me to your holy hill and to your dwelling!
Psalm 86:11 Teach me your way, O LORD, that I may walk in your truth; unite my heart to fear your name.
James 1:18 Of his own will he brought us forth by the word of truth, that we should be a kind of firstfruits of his creatures.
Jesus Is Truth
Matthew 22:16 And they sent their disciples to him, along with the Herodians, saying, “Teacher, we know that you are true and teach the way of God truthfully, and you do not care about anyone’s opinion, for you are not swayed by appearances.
John 1:14 And the Word became flesh and dwelt among us, and we have seen his glory, glory as of the only Son from the Father, full of grace and truth.
John 1:17 For the law was given through Moses; grace and truth came through Jesus Christ.
John 8:31-32 … So Jesus said to the Jews who had believed in him, “If you abide in my word, you are truly my disciples, and you will know the truth, and the truth will set you free.”
John 17:8 For I have given them the words that you gave me, and they have received them and have come to know in truth that I came from you; and they have believed that you sent me. [Jesus speaking]
We saw in “The Context of Love” with the armor of God, that “having fastened on the belt of truth,” we might fight the lies of Satan. As the belt girds the pants and connect the armor of the upper and lower body, so Truth binds our spiritual armor so that no seam presents an easy target. Here’s an axiom:
Love Axiom 23: Only in Love can truth be found 
The Victory of Love

Facing the Giants (2006)
"Grant, I heard a story about two farmers who desperately needed rain. And both of them prayed for rain, but only one of them went out and prepared his fields to receive it. Which one do you think trusted God to send the rain?" Well, the one prepared his fields for it. Which one are you? Mr. Bridges continued. "God will send the rain when He's ready. You need to prepare your field to receive it."
—Mr. Bridges (Ray Wood)
Facing the Giants is an action-packed drama about a Christian high school football coach who uses his undying faith to battle the giants of fear and failure. In six years of coaching, Grant Taylor (Alex Kendrick) has never led his Shiloh Eagles to a winning season. After learning that he and his wife Brooke face infertility, Grant discovers that a group of fathers are secretly organizing to have him dismissed as head coach. Devastated by his circumstances, he cries out to God in desperation.
 
Coach Grant (Alex Kendrick) after a disappointing loss
When Grant receives a message from an unexpected visitor, he searches for a stronger purpose for his football team. He dares to challenge his players to believe God for the impossible on and off the field. When faced with unbelievable odds, the Eagles must step up to their greatest test of strength and courage. What transpires is a dynamic story of the fight between faith and fear. It is in summary a story of victory, but not just in a game—it is a victory in life.
I Can’t Do This
“God can do whatever He wants to do, however He wants to do it. And He chooses to work in our lives because He loves us. He's good. Hope today's a milestone for what He can do for the rest of your life if you trust Him.”
—Coach Grant Taylor
I am not strong enough, not tall enough, not smart enough, not pretty enough, not popular enough…, but He is. How often to we lose the battle before it starts? How often do we admit defeat before the first engagement with the enemy? List to assistant coach J.T. Harkins, Jr.
J.T. Hawkins Jr. (Chris Willis): You act like you gonna miss before you even kick the ball. See, we're gonna have to change your whole kicking philosophy. Now see, you kick it wide left, or wide right, but that ain't gonna get you home. The ball has got to go through the middle.
David Childers (Bailey Cave): I know, coach.
J.T. Hawkins Jr.: No, no, no. You don't. Now what does scripture say about this? Scripture says wide is the gate and broad is the way that leads to destruction. And many that be there find it. Now to us; that's wide left, and wide right. But narrow is the gate and straight is the way that leads to life, and few that be there find it. Anybody can kick it wide left and wide right. My momma can kick it wide left and wide right. But that ain't gonna get you home. It don't have to look great. It don't have to look smooth. It can look like a dying duck. But the ball has got to go through the middle. Now David, you gonna have to choose the narrow way. Cause that's the only path where you gonna get your reward.
You can Do This!
Now it is clutch time for underdog David Childers. Did the lesson from Coach Hawkins stick? Does David choose the narrow way?
Grant Taylor: David, I need a 51-yard field goal.
David Childers: Coach, I can't kick that far.
Grant Taylor: David, they've been stopping the run and the pass all night. You're my best option.
David Childers: Coach, the farthest I've ever kicked is a 39-yarder. There is no way I can kick a 51-yard field goal.
Grant Taylor: I believe you can. Your job is to do the best you can, and leave the rest up to God. I need you on that field. All right, field goal unit!
Announcer #2: I don't understand this, but with two seconds left on the clock, but Coach Grant Taylor and the Shiloh Eagles are putting the game in the hands of a 145-pound backup kicker. This isn't a good move on Grant Taylor's part. He even has to kick into the wind.
Brady Owens (Tracy Goode): Grant, we gotta throw it. He can't kick it from there. It's too far.
Grant Taylor: No, it's not.
Brady Owens: What are you doing?
Grant Taylor: I'm preparing for rain.
David’s crippled father, probably unnoticed by most of the crowd, rises from his wheelchair, and believing in his son, raise the sign of a field goal before the ball leave his son’s foot. Not only did David show up to play, his father showed up to cheer.
 
Larry Childers (Steve Williams) in his wheelchair during another critical kicking situation
Showing Up
You do not have to win a great battle to have a great victory. Victory is measured by heart. Sometime victory just means showing up—getting to the big game, whether the outcome is winning or not.
Grant Taylor: I'm a bit nervous. It's the championship. It's kind of surreal for me.
Mark Richt (himself ): Well, I can promise you. I don't care what level of ball you're coaching; it's surreal when you make it to the championship game. And Grant, I can just tell you: I'm so proud of you and what you've done. I've been reading about the team and where you've gone, and more than anything else I'm just proud of the fact that you finally learned to win the big one.
Grant Taylor: Well, we haven't played them yet.
Mark Richt: No, you won the big one when you accepted Christ. And now that you're teaching these guys and ministering to them, I think it's just fantastic.
Grant Taylor: I got it. These players got it.
Mark Richt: Well, I can promise you: win or loose this game, you guys are champions.
Grant Taylor: I appreciate that.
Mark Richt: But while you're here, you might as well win it, eh?
Grant Taylor: I will try my best. You know, this team we're playing: they're huge, they're fast, they're strong. I just don't want my players to be afraid.
Mark Richt: Well, in God's word He said 365 different times, "Do not fear." Now if He says it that many times, you know He's serious about it, don't ya? 
Where is the Victory?
O victory in Jesus,
My Savior, forever.
He sought me and bought me
With His redeeming blood;
He loved me ere I knew Him
And all my love is due Him,
He plunged me to victory,
Beneath the cleansing flood.
—Eugene Monroe Bartlett, Sr.
If the answer is not obvious, Paul writes in 1 Corinthians 15:57, “But thank God! He gives us victory over sin and death through our Lord Jesus Christ.” 
Love Axiom 24: Love always shows up for the game

 
 
The Union of Love

“At last!” the man exclaimed.
“This one is bone from my bone,
and flesh from my flesh!
She will be called ‘woman,’
because she was taken from ‘man.’”
This explains why a man leaves his father and mother and is joined to his wife, and the two are united into one.
Marriage and Family
Genesis explicitly tells us that “a man shall leave his father and mother,” but it says nothing about the bride doing so. Guys essentially marry into a new family, which is sometimes like mixing apples and oranges. I was blessed enough to marry into a wonderful family. In the Parham family, I was treated like a son.
My Big Fat Greek Wedding (2002)
“You know, the root of the word Miller is a Greek word. Miller came from the Greek word "milo," which is mean "apple," so there you go. As many of you know, our name, Portokalos, is come from the Greek word "portokali," which mean "orange." So, okay? Here tonight, we have, ah, apple and orange. We all different, but in the end, we all fruit.”
—Gus Portokalos (Michael Constantine)
 
Toula Portokalos is 30, Greek, and works in her family's restaurant, Dancing Zorba's, in Chicago. All her father Gus wants is for her to get married to a nice Greek boy. But Toula is looking for more in life. Her mother convinces Gus to let her take some computer classes at college (making him think it's his idea). With those classes under her belt, she then takes over her aunt's travel agency (again making her father think it's his idea). She meets Ian Miller, a high school English teacher, WASP, and dreamboat she had made a fool of herself over at the restaurant; they date secretly for a while before her family finds out. Her father is livid over her dating a non-Greek. He has to learn to accept Ian; Ian has to learn to accept Toula's huge family, and Toula has to learn to accept herself. 
In the end, I think Gus realized that you do not lose your daughter when she marries, you gain a son.
 
Love and Marriage – Frank Sinatra (1955)

 
Love and marriage, love and marriage
Go together like a horse and carriage
This I tell you brother
You can't have one without the other
Love and marriage, love and marriage
It's an institute you can't disparage
Ask the local gentry 
And they will say it's elementary
Try, try, try to separate them
It's an illusion 
Try, try, try, and you will only come
To this conclusion
Love and marriage, love and marriage
Go together like a horse and carriage
Dad was told by mother
You can't have one without the other
Sinatra did not write it, but no one can perform it like he could. It became the theme song for television’s Married with Children, though Al Bundy (Ed O'Neill) did not get it right. It seems he failed to read Ephesians 5
For husbands, this means love your wives, just as Christ loved the church. He gave up his life for her to make her holy and clean, washed by the cleansing of God’s word. He did this to present her to himself as a glorious church without a spot or wrinkle or any other blemish. Instead, she will be holy and without fault. In the same way, husbands ought to love their wives as they love their own bodies. For a man who loves his wife actually shows love for himself. No one hates his own body but feeds and cares for it, just as Christ cares for the church. And we are members of his body.
—Ephesians 5:25-30
Al Bundy did not love his wife as Christ loved the church—I cannot. As lovable as Laurie is, I am incapable of loving her like that, but Christ in me is not. It is the model trio from Chapter 2 that allows this relationship (marriage) to work.
Husbands and Love
For husbands, this means love your wives, just as Christ loved the church. He gave up his life for her to make her holy and clean, washed by the cleansing of God’s word.
—Ephesians 5:25-30
That was worth repeating. In the Greek, verse 25 is rendered as:
οι ανδρες αγαπατε τας γυναικας καθως και ο χριστος ηγαπησεν την εκκλησιαν και εαυτον παρεδωκεν υπερ αυτης
The word for love here is αγαπατε (agapate ̅) and loved is ηγαπησεν (e ̅gape ̅sen). Both are forms of agape ̅. The word is used 20 times in the New Testament, including:
Beloved, if God so loved [ηγαπησεν] us, we ought also to love one another. (1 John 4:11)
For God so loved [ηγαπησεν] the world, that he gave his only begotten Son, that whosoever believeth in him should not perish, but have everlasting life. (John 3:16)
Herein is love, not that we loved [ηγαπησαμεν] God, but that he loved [ηγαπησεν] us, and sent his Son to be the propitiation for our sins. 1 John 4:10
As the Father hath loved [ηγαπησεν] me, so have I loved [ηγαπησα] you: continue ye in my love. (John 15:9)
Agape ̅ is the love described in Corinthians 13, as we saw in Chapter 3. It loves the object of love without expecting anything in return. It is unconditional love, selfless love, and love that never fails. It is the love that Hosea loved Homer with. It is the love that caused our Savior to be nailed to a cross. Men, this is the love we have to have—we are instructed to have—for our wives. It is so important that Paul tells us three time to love our wives in Ephesians 5:25-30.
Recall how Forrest Gump loved Jenny, in spite of all she had or had not done. Though fictional, it is what agape ̅ intends. Like Homer ran from Hosea, so Jenny physically and emotionally ran from Forrest, but never left his mind.
Men, we are no better than Peter who could only phileo ̅ his Lord (John 21:15-17). At least that is all he could manage until the Spirit came an indwelled him at Pentecost. It is the indwelling of the Holy Spirit by which we can love our wives as Christ loved the church.
Even though we know how we should love, we often love in some or all of these ways:
	I will live her as long as she is slim
	I will love as long as she satisfies me sexually
	I will love her as long as she cares for me
	I will love her as long as the kids are around
	I will love her as long as she does not nag me
	And so on
Agape ̅ says that I will love her regardless of her apperence or behavior and regardless of any circumstances. As Randy Travis sang, “I am going to love her forever, forever and ever, Amen.”
So, why am I picking on husbands. There are two reasons. First Paul did not instruct wives to love their husbands; instead, he instructed them to respect their husbands. Second, we often fail miserably. In fact, we have a long history of failing, from the time when Adam failed Eve to present. If there is anything we have done consistently, it is failing to love our wives, the agape ̅ way. Like Conway Twitty’s moon, we “don’t know a thing about love.” Here is an axiom for husbands.
Love Axiom 24. Loving your wife is not a choice—it is a command.
Now let’s see what I learned at the movies.
The Passion of Christ (2004)
What I learned at this movie is I never want to see it again. That does not mean it was terrible. It was terrible, convicting and gut wrenching, but extremely well done. It depicts the final twelve hours in the life of Jesus of Nazareth, on the day of his crucifixion in Jerusalem.
 
Jesus (Jim Caviezel) and Mary (Maia Morgenstern) as He carries His cross
Starting from His prayers in the Garden of Gethsemane and His betrayal at the hands of Judas Iscariot, it goes on to show the trials He endured under Pontius Pilate and King Herod, as well as the torture and ridicule He suffered in between. Once the death sentence is pronounced, He carries a heavy wooden cross to Golgotha amidst throngs of jeering citizens and horrendous beatings, while a few citizens do what they can to help Him. Throughout this time, we are shown memories from His past with His mother and Disciples, where He gives His teachings. Finally, He is crucified, dies, and is buried, but resurrects from the dead on the third day. My description does not do it justice.
In the Passion of Christ, we see the model of marriage: Christ and the church.
“‘For this reason a man shall leave his father and mother and shall be joined to his wife, and the two shall become one flesh.’ This mystery is great; but I am speaking with reference to Christ and the church.”
—Ephesians 5:31-32
Love Axiom 25. Love in marriage is a reflection of a heavenly relationship.
What’s the Point?
Man (humankind) was created to marry! After God had created everything, He instituted marriage. When he had brought every created creature before Adam and found no suitable “help-mate’”, he created woman. However, he did not do so as he had with the rest of creation: out of nothing. For God formed woman out of man. 
Then the Lord God said, “It is not good for the man to be alone; I will make him a helper suitable for him.” Out of the ground the Lord God formed every beast of the field and every bird of the sky, and brought them to the man to see what he would call them; and whatever the man called a living creature, that was its name. The man gave names to all the cattle, and to the birds of the sky, and to every beast of the field, but for Adam there was not found a helper suitable for him. So the Lord God caused a deep sleep to fall upon the man, and he slept; then He took one of his ribs and closed up the flesh at that place. The Lord God [t]fashioned into a woman the rib which He had taken from the man, and brought her to the man. The man said,

“This is now bone of my bones,
And flesh of my flesh;
She shall be called Woman,
Because she was taken out of Man.”
For this reason a man shall leave his father and his mother, and be joined to his wife; and they shall become one flesh. And the man and his wife were both naked and were not ashamed.
—Genesis 2:18-25
We wonder about the Trinity. How can God be three persons? What does that look like? Well, here we have a glimpse: humankind is two persons, man and woman.
I hear many arguments for homosexual marriage and transgender modification, but God’s intent for humankind is very clear: He meant for men to be men and for marriage to be a relationship between a man and a women—and He meant it to be permanent! This is what he made us for—our reason for existence. In marriage, we are to reflect Christ and the Church.
Marriage is a Covenant Relationship
Did God set some men apart, not to be married? Perhaps He did, but marriage is the norm and it is a covenant relationship between a man and a woman. We saw hints of this in Chapter 6, The Standard of Love.
What does Scripture say about the marriage covenant? The answer is not straight-forward for it is only found in context. However, I make the claim that marriage was the very first covenant relationship.
	Marriage it to hold a place of honor
Marriage is to be held in honor among all, and the marriage bed is to be undefiled; for fornicators and adulterers God will judge.
—Hebrews 13:4
	Marriage is a requirement for procreation.
Genesis 6:18 – But I will establish My covenant with you; and you shall enter the ark—you and your sons and your wife, and your sons’ wives with you.
Genesis 9:9 – “Now behold, I Myself do establish My covenant with you, and with your descendants after you;
Genesis 17:2 – “I will establish My covenant between Me and you, And I will multiply you exceedingly.”
Genesis 17:4 – “As for Me, behold, My covenant is with you, And you will be the father of a multitude of nations.
Genesis 17:7 –  I will establish My covenant between Me and you and your descendants after you throughout their generations for an everlasting covenant, to be God to you and to your descendants after you.
	Marriage is a reflection of a heavenly relationship.
For this reason a man shall leave his father and his mother, and be joined to his wife; and they shall become one flesh. And the man and his wife were both naked and were not ashamed.
—Genesis 2:18-25
“‘For this reason a man shall leave his father and mother and shall be joined to his wife, and the two shall become one flesh.’ This mystery is great; but I am speaking with reference to Christ and the church.”
—Ephesians 5:31-32
In the New American Standard Bible (NASB), there are 315 verses that deal with covenant, and just as may that imply covenant. Moreover, every time there is a covenant, blood must be shed. The first time in the Bible for the shedding of blood was when God made clothing (garments of skin) for Adam and Eve.
Now the man called his wife’s name Eve, because she was the mother of all the living. The Lord God made garments of skin for Adam and his wife, and clothed them.
—Genesis 3:20-21
The last time blood was shed was at the crucifixion of Christ for a new covenant.
But when Christ came as high priest of the good things that are now already here, he went through the greater and more perfect tabernacle that is not made with human hands, that is to say, is not a part of this creation. He did not enter by means of the blood of goats and calves; but he entered the Most Holy Place once for all by his own blood, thus obtaining eternal redemption. The blood of goats and bulls and the ashes of a heifer sprinkled on those who are ceremonially unclean sanctify them so that they are outwardly clean. How much more, then, will the blood of Christ, who through the eternal Spirit offered himself unblemished to God, cleanse our consciences from acts that lead to death, so that we may serve the living God!
For this reason Christ is the mediator of a new covenant, that those who are called may receive the promised eternal inheritance—now that he has died as a ransom to set them free from the sins committed under the first covenant.
—Hebrews 9: 11-15
So, in this manner marriage is not only a covenant relationship, but the very first of its kind. For generations, the marriage covenant was brought down this way, requiring priests and ceremonies and various symbols of covenant (like rings, the binding of hands, etc.). An at the center is love, the commandment to men to love their wives as Christ loved His bride, the church.
Through time, the enemy (Satan) has twisted Scripture enough to wash out this truth, much like Tom Sawyer whitewashed Aunt Polly’s fence. Today, marriage is a convenience that can be entered into and out of at any time, under any circumstances, and by anyone. But Love does not operate that way. Borrowing from television (and Mr. Sinatra, of course):
Love Axiom 26. Love and marriage go together like a horse and carriage.
Marriage was created for Love. God made it for himself, for the Christ and the Church. He intended it to be reflected in us, as husbands and wives.
 

 
The Death of Love
Through early morning fog I see
Visions of the things to be
The pains that are withheld for me
I realize and I can see... 
REFRAIN:	That suicide is painless
It brings on many changes
And I can take or leave it if I please.
I try to find a way to make
All our little joys relate
Without that ever-present hate
But now I know that it's too late, and... 
[REFRAIN]
The game of life is hard to play
I'm gonna lose it anyway
The losing card I'll someday lay
So this is all I have to say.
[REFRAIN]
The only way to win is cheat
And lay it down before I'm beat
And to another give my seat
For that's the only painless feat.
[REFRAIN]
The sword of time will pierce our skins
It doesn't hurt when it begins
But as it works it's way on in
The pain grows stronger... watch it grin, but... 
[REFRAIN]
A brave man once requested me
To answer questions that are key
Is it to be or not to be
And I replied 'oh why ask me?'
[REFRAIN]
(Altman, 1970)
This depressing song , by Johnny Mandel – Suicide Is Painless – became popular as the theme of the movie and television series, MASH. I had finished writing Quantum Love with the previous chapter, but for some reason, I did not publish it straight away. Something held me back.
 
Duke (Tom Skerritt) makes a last toast to Painless (John Schuck) who plans suicide after the last supper attended by Ugly John (Carl Gotlieb), Vollmer (David Arkin), Hawkeye (David Sutherland), Trapper (Elliot Gould) (Ochs, 2013)
Vision of the Things to be
Using a statistical formula typically applied to tracking outbreaks of diseases, researchers at Columbia University and other institutions confirmed in 1990 that suicide is contagious and can be transmitted between people. Contagion spreads either directly, by knowing a suicide victim, or indirectly, by learning of a suicide through word-of-mouth or the media. Those same researchers found that people ages 15 to 19 are two to four times more prone to suicide contagion than people in other age groups. (Kunter, 2016)
Max Kunter writes the following:
“One known precursor to the current wave of suicides was in 2011, when a Colorado Springs father found his 12-year-old son suspended from a bunk bed. The parents insist it was not a suicide and instead blame the “choking game,” in which a person cuts off blood flow to the brain and then releases it in order to feel lightheaded or even high. The coroner’s office ruled the cause of death “undetermined.” In 2013, a 15-year-old from the same school district strangled himself, and his parents blamed the choking game. The number of teen suicides started picking up in the spring of 2015, when a Discovery Canyon Campus student shot herself. The next month, three local kids took their own lives. From June to November, there were five more suicides in the Colorado Springs area; in December, there was on average one teen suicide per week. The deaths surged again toward the end of the last school year, beginning with Riley’s suicide.”
Living in Colorado Springs, these senseless deaths hit close to home and have affected my teenage daughters in ways I could not fathom, as well as other teens I know. To add to Kunter’s account, the teens who Kunter writes about are from affluent families. Two recent ones were boys (one had been a part of our AWANA  ministry), both very popular, one a senior, the other an athlete. What happened? 
The Pains Withheld for Me
“The so-called ‘psychotically depressed’ person who tries to kill herself doesn’t do so out of quote ‘hopelessness’ or any abstract conviction that life’s assets and debits do not square. And surely not because death seems suddenly appealing. The person in whom its invisible agony reaches a certain unendurable level will kill herself the same way a trapped person will eventually jump from the window of a burning high-rise. Make no mistake about people who leap from burning windows. Their terror of falling from a great height is still just as great as it would be for you or me standing speculatively at the same window just checking out the view; i.e. the fear of falling remains a constant. The variable here is the other terror, the fire’s flames: when the flames get close enough, falling to death becomes the slightly less terrible of two terrors. It’s not desiring the fall; it’s terror of the flames. And yet nobody down on the sidewalk, looking up and yelling ‘Don’t!’ and ‘Hang on!’, can understand the jump. Not really. You’d have to have personally been trapped and felt flames to really understand a terror way beyond falling.” ― David Foster Wallace
The Holmes And Rahe Stress Scale is often used by doctors to find this answer: Can the most stressful life events predict future illness? Two researchers in 1967 thought so. Combing through the medical records of over 5,000 patients to investigate if there was a connection between illness and the most stressful life events, Thomas Holmes and Richard Rahe found that a strong correlation did exist. This correlation was so strong that the stressful situations could be ranked on a scale from most stressful to least stressful. These could indicate which life stressors put people at higher risk for becoming ill as a result. Chronic pain patients, in particular, can be impacted by the top life stressors. (Doctor, 2016)
Adults		Non-adults	
Event	Score	Event	Score
1. Death of a spouse	100	1. Death of a parent	100
2. Divorce	73	2. Unplanned pregnancy/abortion	100
3. Marital separation	65	3. Getting married	95
4. Imprisonment	63	4. Divorce of parents	90
5. Death of a close family member	63	5. Acquiring a visible deformity	80
6. Personal injury or illness	53	6. Fathering a child	70
7. Marriage	50	7. Jail sentence of a parent for over one year	70
8. Dismissal from work	47	8. Marital separation of parents	69
9. Marital reconciliation	45	9. Death of a sibling	  68
10. Retirement	45	10. Change in acceptance by peers	  67
	604		674
Although not directly connected with suicide, these non-adult events might be contributing factor in teen suicide and entail many of the emotions I will discuss below. Also note the higher scores for teens.
If the Church Lady (Dana Carvey on Saturday Night Live), she would no doubt tell us that emotions are from Satan! Although I will not go that far, I will say how we deal with emotions can be influenced by Satan. If you recall from the Anatomy of Love (Chapter 3), agape love is not an emotion—it is a “decision” or commitment requiring the indwelling of the Holy Spirt. Love has, or shall I say is, a solution to every negative feeling or emotion, as described in the table below.
The top 10 emotions on my list are the ones I see most often, in most people. Now, remember, these are just the ones that I commonly find to be lodged in the body. Certain events or years of your life can create different types of emotions, and even multiples of the same ones. They can only harm if you don’t let them go. (Scher, 2012)
Emotion	Love’s Solution	Reference
1. Anxiety	Love removes anxiety	Philippians 4:6-7; 1st  Peter 5:7
2. Disgusted	Love equips us to not be shaken	Psalm 62:5-6; 147:3; 2nd  Peter 3:16
3. Grief-stricken	Love takes the tears and sorrows away 	Psalm 147:3 ; Isaiah 53:4-6 ; Revelation 21:4
4. Criticized	Love builds up and encourages	Romans 14:1-4; Ephesians 4:29; Thessalonians 5:11
5. Unsupported	Love will keep us from being isolated	1st  Corinthians 6:19; 12:14, 27
6. Unsafe	Love takes away fear	Psalm 32:72 Thessalonians 3:3 ; 2nd  Timothy 1:7
7. Overwhelmed	Love will carry your burdens	Psalm 55:22; 68:19-20; Matt 11:29-30
8. Worthless	Love values you entirely &  Love died for you 	Psalm 139:13-16; Jeremiah 29:11; Luke 12:7; John 3:16
9. Helpless	Love will be your help	Psalm 46:1; 54:4; 121:2
10. Conflicted	Love deconflicts	Proverbs 10:12; 1st  Corinthians 10:13; Hebrews 4:15-16
Bottom Line	Love died for you	John 3:16; 1st  John 3:16; 4:16
  
Dan Carvey as the Church Lady on Saturday Night Live’s talk show call “Church Chat”. During a Christmas-themed December broadcast, using a magnetic spelling board, she rearranged letters spelling “Santa” to reveal “Satan”

I Realize And I Can See
I know only what I hear and see. On a recent youth retreat ( I was there as security and as a medic), the youth pastor had the students do an exercise in their small groups. They were provided a plain white mask to write their identities upon. At a later worship period, they took their masks, their identities, and hung them on the cross. No holds were barred—They could write anything that identified themselves, even if it included profanity. What church group would allow profanity to be used? That I can answer: a real one, a true one!
The Pains that are Withheld for Me
Hang onto your horse and be prepared for a few four-letter words (I’ll just abbreviate):
	F’-in idiot		Ugly
	F’-in loser		Alone
	F’-in worthless		Invisible

These are mostly kids that I thought had it together, including my own daughter! What on earth has done this to them? “On earth” is the key: 
We have modeled love to them, but not God’s love!
Rather, we have shown them a love of selfishness, that can come and go, can be or not be, and can lie or not lie. Everything about “our” love is false! Allow me to contrast God’s love and our love:
God’s love
Our love
Agape, Phileo
epithumia, eros, ludos

Selfless	Selfish
Expects nothing in return	Is greedy for what we can draw form it
Is patient
Can’t wait
Is kind	Is however we feel at the moment
Does not envy	Covets as much as it can
Not easily angered	Is very explosive
Keeps no records of wrong	Carves wrongs in marble 
Does not delight in evil	Strives in it: adultery, pornography, divorce, etc.
Always protects	Protects when it is advantageous to us
Always trust	Is grounded in distrust
Always hopes	Is hopeless
Always preservers	Can be thrown away at a whim
Never fails	Seldom succeeds

No wonder our teens are in trouble! 
According to the American Academy of Children and Adolescent Psychiatry (AACAP), Suicide is the third leading cause of death for 15-to-24-year-olds, and the sixth leading cause of death for 5-to-14-year-olds.
Suicide is Selfish
Who benefits from suicide? Is it really painless? Now if the devil were to commit suicide, I’d be all for it. But Satan uses it his advantage. In fact, it has become his favorite tool, next to fear. Suicide is an easy way out of our false love.
But I love my teens! Do you love them like Christ loves the church (Ephesians 13 also says to agape one another)? Do we model agape for them al the time? Do we walk the walk or merely talk the talk? Even as I type these words, I know that I have failed miserably. We love if it benefits us (sometimes blindly or without thought).
“it [love] is not self-seeking”
—1 Corinthians 13:5c.
Love Axiom 27. Real love is totally selfless.
The Social Media Phenomenon
I “love” social media. I can do some really spectacular things through LinkedIn, for instance. I have around 12,000 followers, have written 485 posts (articles), found a job I love, gained valuable connections, and so on.
What do our teens do with social media? Before I answer this question, allow me to caveat it with:
	I am not a child psychologist
	I have not conducted a research study
	I only have anecdotal evidence
Every teen on Facebook (well maybe not “every”) who wants to be “cool” (I am sure they do not use that expression) shows the following:
	They look good
	They feel good
	They do good
	Their boyfriend or girlfriend is hot
They are living a lie! When the take measure of the facts, they realize they have fallen short. They may see themselves as failures. They have a few bad days in a week (maybe more). Suicide seems like an easy escape or a cry for help.
How do I know this? Well, one sign is the new Country music. Some have dubbed it, “Ro-Country,” which is short for Romance Country. Every new Country singer has a hot chick, with a white T-shirt, tight jeans, and ruby red lips,  and if they don’t have here at the start of the song, they wind up in bed with her by the end. We must has some really hot (or lucky) Country singers.
Perhaps the reality is this:
	I feel ugly no matter what I do to “fix myself up”
	I feel lousy most if not all of the time
	I feel like I can’t do anything good
	I really don’t like the relationship I’m in – and my girlfriend is not “hot” 
	I feel like my parents are preoccupied with their own lives
	I feel all alone
	I feel like a loser
	Life sucks!
In 1986, I assumed command of U.S. Army cavalry unit with a Cold War border mission. The troop was in trouble. It had a drug problem, an alcohol problem, a discipline problem, and a wife swapping ring. I took command in mid-July and by Christmas we had a dozen or more suicide attempts (out of 150 soldiers). All of them were assessed as “gestures” after formal investigation were conducted. A neighboring unit had one or two successful attempts (out of 90 soldiers). Suicide is not new—social media has just made it popular. These soldiers felt that way too!
Here’s some truth as I look back on life:
	I do not think I am outwardly attractive 
	I do not feel good all the time
	There is much I cannot do or am powerless to effect
	At times I have not enjoyed my relationships at all times
	At times I am preoccupied with my own “problems”
	I had a lousy father
	I feel alone at times (maybe because of my Asperger’s)
	I lose a lot
	Life really does suck!
Here’s were we go wrong: we look at life from the world’s standard, not by an eternal perspective. When we are 16 years old, we are experts on life. “When I was a child” is a common thought. We know everything. We know what’s best for us. We are extremely self-centered. Right now is the most important moment of my life. Have I thought about suicide? More than once! 
A policeman friend of mine said that when people drive, thy are focused on their hood ornament. That is how we live our lives. We do not look at life with an eternal perspective. We do not see our lives as God does. God said, “While we were still His enemies, He sacrificed His life for us, so that we might dwell with Him eternally.” [my paraphrase] The truth is, “it” is all about Christ! Here is what we get if we get what He is all about:
	I am a beautiful creation to Him
	I have rest in Him
	I can do all things through Him who gives me strength
	My relationships are ordained by Him
	He bears all my burdens
	I have the greatest Father of all
	He is always with me
	I am already victorious in Him
	Life here is supposed to suck! And I am ready to go Home, when He takes me there. Suicide is never an option.
Social media platforms, such as chat rooms, blogging Web sites (e.g., Tumblr, Reddit), video sites (e.g., YouTube), social networking sites (e.g., Facebook, MySpace, Twitter, Google+), as well as e-mail, text messaging, and video chat, have transformed traditional methods of communication by allowing the instantaneous and interactive sharing of information created and controlled by individuals, groups, organizations, and governments. (Luxton, June, & Fairall, 2012) As of the third quarter of 2015, Facebook had 1.55 billion monthly active users. An immense quantity of information on the topic of suicide is available on the Internet and via social media. The information available on social media on the topic of suicide can influence suicidal behavior, both negatively and positively.
Contributors to these social media platforms may also exert peer pressure to commit suicide, idolize those who have completed suicide, and facilitate suicide pacts. These pro-suicidal sites reported the following. For example, on a Japanese message board in 2008 it was shared that a person can kill himself/herself using hydrogen sulfide gas. Shortly after 220 people attempted suicide in this way, and 208 were successful. (Luxton, June, & Fairall, 2012) Biddle et al. (Biddle, Donovan, Hawton, Kapur, & Gunnell, 2008) conducted a systematic Web search of 12 suicide-associated terms (e.g., suicide, suicide methods, how to kill yourself, and best suicide methods) to analyze the search results and found that pro-suicide sites and chat rooms that discussed general issues associated with suicide most often occurred within the first few hits of a search. Recupero et al. (R., Harmss, & Noble, 2008) also conducted a study that examined suicide-related sites that can be found using Internet search engines. Of 373 Web site hits, 31% were suicide neutral, 29% were anti-suicide, and 11% were pro-suicide. Together, these studies have shown that obtaining pro-suicide information on the Internet, including detailed information on suicide methods, is very easy. (Luxton, June, & Fairall, 2012)
Social media is not going to help you with your self-image. It too can be a tool of the enemy, and I believe it spreads this contagion. Studies now show that one person’s suicidal behavior can spur another’s, and one death can lead to more deaths. These incidences are spread over Instagram and Facebook like wildfire.
What does the Bible have to say about contagious diseases?
When Jesus came down from the mountainside, large crowds followed him. A man with leprosy[a] came and knelt before him and said, “Lord, if you are willing, you can make me clean.” Jesus reached out his hand and touched the man. “I am willing,” he said. “Be clean!” Immediately he was cleansed of his leprosy.
—Matthew 8-1-3
Love Axiom 28. Love can stop epidemics in their tracks
Suicide is not Painless
We’ll, I admit it might hurt the subject of the suicide for a few seconds or so, or maybe it is completely painless. I would not know. But it is not painless for those around you. It hurts the ones who love you and some that barely know you.
“and he suddenly knew that if she killed herself, he would die. Maybe not immediately, maybe not with the same blinding rush of pain, but it would happen. You couldn’t live for very long without a heart.” 
― Jodi Picoult
Smokey the Bear, as a spokesperson for National Forests said, “Only you can prevent forest fires.” Well, to some degree, only you can prevent suicide. I cannot save you. I cannot love you unconditionally. I cannot make your life matter. Only Jesus Christ can do these things. Only He has the power to heal and to save! But He wants me to tell you so. He wants me to love you as much as I can, to make you feel loved, and to make you feel that you matter.
“Since therefore the children share in flesh and blood, he himself likewise partook of the same things, that through death he might destroy the one who has the power of death, that is, the devil, and deliver all those who through fear of death were subject to lifelong slavery.”
—Hebrews 2:14-15
Love Axiom 29. Love conquered suicide.
The Game of Life is Really Hard to Play
Let’s go back to the movies. Tom Hanks (playing Coach Jimmy Dugan), in a League of Their Own, says (about the game of baseball):
“It’s supposed to be hard. If it wasn’t hard everybody would do it. It’s the hard that makes it great!”
This is the story of the first female professional baseball league, which was formed during World War II while many male players were overseas fighting or training for war. The All-American Girls Professional Baseball League was a women’s professional baseball league founded by Philip K. Wrigley which existed from 1943 to 1954. Over 600 women played in the league.
 
Kit Keller (Lori Petty), Jimmy Dugan (Tom Hanks), and Dotti Hinson (Gina Davis) in A League of Their Own
Life is tough as nails, and the saying that, “when the going gets touch, the tough get going,” often falls short. If I had a dollar for every tough day I have had, I’d be the wealthiest man in the world. But the world is supposed t be that way. After all, look at who the ruler of the world is:
John 14:29-31 – And now I have told you before it takes place, so that when it does take place you may believe. – He has no claim on me, but I do as the Father has commanded me, so that the world may know that I love the Father. Rise, let us go from here.
Romans 6:8-10 – Now if we have died with Christ, we believe that we will also live with him. We know that Christ, being raised from the dead, will never die again; death no longer has dominion over him. For the death he died he died to sin, once for all, but the life he lives he lives to God.
Revelation 17:17-18 – for God has put it into their hearts to carry out his purpose by being of one mind and handing over their royal power to the beast, until the words of God are fulfilled. And the woman that you saw is the great city that has dominion over the kings of the earth.”
Job 2:2 – The Lord said to Satan, “Where have you come from?” Then Satan answered the Lord and said, “From roaming about on the earth and walking around on it.”
Without going into a long apologetic, I claim that Satan is the ruler of this world. Moreover, though Christians are in the world, we are not part of the world.
John 3:19 – This is the judgment, that the Light has come into the world, and men loved the darkness rather than the Light, for their deeds were evil.
John 12:30-32 – Jesus answered and said, “This voice has not come for My sake, but for your sakes. Now judgment is upon this world; now the ruler of this world will be cast out. And I, if I am lifted up from the earth, will draw all men to Myself.”
John 15:18-20 – “If the world hates you, you know that it has hated Me before it hated you. If you were of the world, the world would love its own; but because you are not of the world, but I chose you out of the world, because of this the world hates you. Remember the word that I said to you, ‘A slave is not greater than his master.’ If they persecuted Me, they will also persecute you; if they kept My word, they will keep yours also.
John 18:36 – Jesus answered, “My kingdom is not of this world. If My kingdom were of this world, then My servants would be fighting so that I would not be handed over to the Jews; but as it is, My kingdom is not of this realm.”
Ephesians 2:1-2 – And you were dead in your trespasses and sins, in which you formerly walked according to the course of this world, according to the prince of the power of the air, of the spirit that is now working in the sons of disobedience.
Romans 12:2 – And do not be conformed to this world, but be transformed by the renewing of your mind, so that you may prove what the will of God is, that which is good and acceptable and perfect.
Failure and Success
My sixteen-year-old runs track for Falcon High School. Today she ran the 100 meter dash and took 2nd in the meet. It was her first time running that event. She had a bad start in the 200 meter dash and finished 6th. Her team had trouble with hand-offs in the 4 by 100 relay and did not place. The 800 meter medley was cancelled. She is elated with her success (I was worried that she would not be). And, she learned from her bad start from the blocks. Footnote: I feel like I am a lousy parent most of the time—the success was all hers.
“The test of success is not what you do when you are on top. Success is how high you bounce when you hit the bottom.” 
― General George S. Patton Jr.
I know of a man whose life seemed filled with failure. In 1818, his mother died when he was 9 years old. In 1832, he lost his job and was defeated in a race for a state legislature position. In 1833, he suffered a failed business. In 1835, his sweetheart died. In 1836, he experienced a nervous breakdown. In 1838, he lost a race for Speaker. In 1843, he was defeated for nomination for Congress. In 1848, he lost re-nomination. In 1849, he was rejected for a position as land officer. In 1854, he was defeated for a U.S. Senate seat. In 1856, he lost a race for nomination for Vice President. In 1858, he again was defeated for a U.S. Senate seat. Two of his sons died before reaching manhood, one in 1846 at age three and another in 1862 at age twelve. Between the years 1861 and 1865, he held a divided nation together that was ultimately reunited. His name is Abraham Lincoln. Life probably sucked for him on occasion.
To answer questions that are key 
What is the Significance of all this? The rules of the world do not apply to us. Facebook is not our standard. The athletics program at our school is not our standard. Our workplace is not our standard. Christ is our only standard!
The world is supposed to stand opposed to me. If I am truly living in Christ, then I should be offensive to the world and a serious threat to the ruler over this world. And if I have the power of the Spirit in me (and I do) then nothing in this world can overcome me. Not even the lies of the enemy that might cause me to commit suicide. And it is the “hard that makes it great!”
Love Axiom 30. Real love is hard, but rewarding.
All I have left is summed-up in the gospel message. It is good news! But suicide kills it—and I am quite sure it kills Him all over again.
For it is impossible, in the case of those who have once been enlightened, who have tasted the heavenly gift, and have shared in the Holy Spirit, and have tasted the goodness of the word of God and the powers of the age to come, and then have fallen away, to restore them again to repentance, since they are crucifying once again the Son of God to their own harm and holding him up to contempt.
—Hebrews 6:4-6
All of this raises key questions for which I do not have all the answers, but God does and prayer is key. Closing on a good note, we merely have to accept who he is and what he has done to save us from our worst enemy: ourselves!
“For God so loved the world, that he gave his only Son, that whoever believes in him should not perish but have eternal life.
—John 3:16
It is time for love to intervene before it is overcome by death.

 
Epilog
This all started with Quantum Phaith. It had been in my mind many years before it was released in 2011. I knew intuitively that the Biblical account of creation superseded all scientific theories, and I set out, not to prove, but to demonstrate it. I convinced myself, at least—a mathematician always requires truth. I found it between Genesis 1:1 and Revelation 22:21. The account of Creation in  Scripture (not just Genesis) is accurate when properly dissected. 
There are two axioms I took from Quantum Phaith (I know that is not the correct spelling of “faith):
	Scripture has to be interpreted within context—culture, language, etc.
	Scripture interprets Scripture—you have to look at it holistically.
Next came Quantum Hope. It did not stem from questions about science. Rather, it came from 1 Corinthians 13, and the trilogy of gifts: faith, hope, and love. Without hope, faith is worthless. The Bible says, “Now faith is the assurance of things hoped for, the conviction of things not seen. (Hebrews 11:1). Without hope, what’s the point of faith?
I had never heard this addressed before. I felt the need to do so. There are two truths I discovered.
	Hope does not float like the movie (Hope Floats)
	Hope is a person—Jesus Christ
Since I had stated the walk down Corinthian Road, I felt convicted to write about love, the ultimate goal. Paul wrote, “So now faith, hope, and love abide, these three; but the greatest of these is love.” (1 Corinthians 13:13).
Now you have the whole story. I believe that we can summarize the message of this book by summing up the Bible. When asked what is it all about, we can use Paul’s words: it is about Faith, Hope, and Love, or “God’s love letter to us.” 
 
Axioms of Love
Love Axiom 1: Treat the wrongs that were done to you as if they were written in the sand, and the rights done for you as if they were written in stone.
Love Axiom 2. Selfless acts of love are weightier that mere words and words not based on these acts are meaningless.
Love Axiom 3. Love has no fear.
Love Axiom 4. True love is measurable.
Love Axiom 5: True love is color blind.
Love Axiom 6. God's love is certain.
Love Axiom 7. It takes three to love—Christ and two others.
Love Axiom 8. Love is not an emotion—it is a decision.
Love Axiom 9. Love conquered death.
Love Axiom 10. Love casts out all fear.
Love Axiom 11. Love comes backed with ultimate power.
Love Axiom 12. Love equips us for every situation.
Love Axiom 13. Love cares not about numbers.
Love Axiom 14. Love binds us together as brothers and sisters.
Love Axiom 15. Love is greater than anything imaginable.
Love Axiom 16: Love has no bounds.
Love Axiom 17: Love is willing to go to extremes to express itself.
Love Axiom 18: Love hurts but it also heals.
Love Axiom 19: Because of Love, we all belong in heaven.
Love Axiom 20: Love continuously pursues the object of its love.
Love Axiom 21: Love is stronger than any chains and can break the strongest bonds.
Love Axiom 22: Love’s esteem can cover all inadequacies.
Love Axiom 23: Only in Love can truth be found.
Love Axiom 24: Love always shows up for the game.
Love Axiom 24. Loving your wife is not a choice—it is a command.
Love Axiom 25. Love in marriage is a reflection of a heavenly relationship.
Love Axiom 26. Love and marriage go together like a horse and carriage.
Love Axiom 27. Real love is totally selfless.
Love Axiom 28. Love can stop epidemics in their tracks.
Love Axiom 29. Love conquered suicide.
Love Axiom 30. Real love is hard, but rewarding.
