Preface
“Hope is what we crave
And that will never change
So I stand and wait
I need a drop of grace
To carry me today
A simple song to sing
It's written on my soul
Hope's what we crave”
— for King and Country [1]
from the album Crave 
What do people crave? What do they crave the most? The answers to the first question would vary greatly depending on one’s interest, culture, creed, and so on. You might crave a red mustang convertible, like my wife. You might crave to own the horse you lease, like my oldest daughter, you might crave a year supply of Mary Kay products, like my youngest daughter. You might crave acceptance, like me. And the “crave list” goes on.
None of these, however, really get to the essence of what we crave. Answering the second question might, but I am not convinced that it will. Since the question may not draw the correct response, I will let the Christian artists, for King and Country  answer it: “Hope is what we crave!”
Now, hope is what we crave, but quantum hope is what we need. I am not speaking of the book that you have started to read, although you really need that very much, and I need you to need it so that I can send my children to college… just kidding. Quantum hope is the subject of the book, and it is a sequel to Quantum Phaith, which I wrote in 2011. In Quantum Hope, we will explore the concept of Christian hope: what it is; what it is not; where it comes from; how it is manifested; and so on.
In physics, a quantum (plural: quanta) is the minimum amount of any physical entity involved in an interaction. Behind this, one finds the fundamental notion that a physical property may be “quantized,” referred to as “the hypothesis of quantization”. This means that the magnitude can take on only certain discrete values. The word “quantum” comes from the Latin “quantus,” for “how much.”
Therefore, I have defined quantum hope as the minimum amount of hope required for interacting with and living a life of faith in Christ. Without quantum hope, quantum faith is void, for “faith is the assurance of things hoped for, the conviction of things not seen.” (Hebrews 11:1, ESV)
Thus, in Quantum Hope, we will examine the “things hoped for”. These are things that we cannot see (Romans 8:24 and Hebrews 11:1). They are, however, things that we can measure—quantum hope may be quantized.
During our journey, we will stop along the way to visit exotic places like Rational and Irrational Numbers, the Big Bang, Romans 8, the Uncertainty Principle, Middle Earth, Schizophrenia, the Atom and Smithville, Texas. To help us along our journey, we will call upon Muhammad Ali, Samwise Gamgee, Michael Oher, Sandra Bullock, John Forbes Nash, Rick Moranis, Victor Marx, Kurt Gödel, Irving Blitzer, Karl Heisenberg, Paul the Apostle and others.
In writing this book I have taken my own journey and scouted the route that I will take you on. I would not have completed my reconnaissance or reached the point where I am today without my wife, Laurie, whom I have already acknowledged.  But there are more… 
I owe a deep debt of gratitude to Joe Kier, my best friend, and 33rd Degree Mason, who taught me how to consider other points of view.  To Drew Holland, Colorado Springs Police Department, who is not only a dear friend, but may be the smartest person I know.  To Igor Szczyrba, Ph.D., Professor, who stimulated my interest in Quantum Physics and Theory of the Mind.  To Robert Mayes, Ph.D., Professor, who taught me how to perform research.  To Bob Simmonds, Ph.D., who taught me how to explore and think outside the box.  To Roger Smith, Ph.D., who taught me how easy it is to self-publish.  And to Pastor Daniel Rolfe, Mountain Springs Church, spiritual leader and friend.
 

 
What is Quantum Phaith?
You’ll have to read the prequel, Quantum Phaith!  I am just kidding and will summarize it here.
Gaining Perspective
"Everyone else would climb a peak by looking for a path somewhere in the mountain.  [John] Nash would climb another mountain altogether and from that distant peak would shine a searchlight back onto the first peak." 
—Donald Newman (A Beautiful Mind by S. Nasar, p. 12)
Introduction
I have struggled with what should come first, a discussion of biblical hope or a discussion of quantum physics (or quantum mechanics).  In the end, I had to consider what came from what.  Many scientists would claim that their hope—if they have any at all—evolved from their study of the science.  For me it was Biblical hope that caused me to study and led me to explore the mysteries of mathematics and physics.
There is a verse in Scripture that many know or have heard (even people who have never picked up a Bible).  The New American Standard translation of Luke 17:6 says:
And the Lord said, “If you had faith like a mustard seed, you would say to this mulberry tree, ‘Be uprooted and be planted in the sea’; and it would obey you”. [2] (NASB)
I have to admit that my faith is much smaller than mustard seed, which by the way is very tiny.  I have always used, not by choice, sweat, blood, and a shovel to move trees (or at least very small trees).  Although I have never held a mustard seed, there is an abundance of information about mustard seeds available through the internet.  I suppose Jesus had first-hand experience when he spoke about a mustard seed—I have no reason to doubt otherwise.
Κόκκος σίναπι (What would we do without mustard seeds?)
The Greek renders Jesus’ reference to a mustard seed as κόκκον σινάπεως, transliterated as kosson sinapeōs.  The word Κόκκος, kokkos, is translated five times as ‘grain’ and once as ‘corn’ in the King James Version (KJV).  The word σίναπι, sinapi, occurs five times in the KJV and is translated as ‘mustard seed’ in all five instances.  Strong’s Lexicon says that mustard is “the name of a plant which in oriental countries grows from a very small seed and attains a height of a tree, 10 feet (3 m) and more; hence a very small quantity of a thing is likened to a mustard seed, and also a thing which grows to a remarkable size.” [3]
The Latin Vulgate renders the verse as:
dixit autem Dominus si haberetis fidem sicut granum sinapis diceretis huic arbori moro eradicare et transplantare in mare et oboediret vobis
I mention the Latin here since it is from the Latin word quanta that we derive the English word quantity.  I also want to make it clear that the Latin did not render the Greek work for grain as quantum, rather as granum.  However, Matthew 13:32 describes the mustard seed as “quod minimum quidem est omnibus seminibus”, that is, “the least indeed of all seeds”.  Although I lack direct historical literary evidence that Jesus had in mind the concept of a small quantity when he speaks of a mustard seed, in this case, the context of His words speaks of a “small but measureable quantity of a thing”.
Later, we will review the concept or meaning of biblical faith, but first let’s digress and explore the concept of small quantities of things.
Fundamentals of Physical Quantities
If you are close to my age (56), then you probably remember the television series Quantum Leap.  If you are younger, you may have heard terms like quantum computing or quantum numbers.  At any rate, you have probably heard the word quantum, whether you paid any attention to it or not.
In physics, a quantum (plural: quanta) is the minimum amount of any physical entity involved in an interaction.  Behind this, one finds the fundamental notion that a physical property may be ‘quantized’, referred to as ‘the hypothesis of quantization’ [4].  This means that the magnitude can take on only certain discrete values, leading to the related term called “quantum number”.  An example of a quantized entity is the energy transfer of elementary particles of matter (called fermions) and of photons, and other bosons. [5]
A photon is a single quantum of light, and is referred to as a light quantum.  The energy of an electron, bound to an atom (at rest), is said to be quantized, which results in the stability of atoms, and of matter in general.
As incorporated into the theory of quantum mechanics, physicists regard this as part of the fundamental framework for understanding and describing nature at the infinitesimal level.
Normally quanta are considered discrete packets with energy stored in them. Max Planck (pictured right in 1918, the year he won the Nobel Prize for his work in quantum theory) considered these quanta to be particles that can change their form (meaning that they can be absorbed and released).  This phenomenon can be observed in the case of blackbody radiation, when it is being heated and cooled.
What is Faith?
In the New Testament writings, especially those of Paul, Faith and Hope have a special bond, a nearly inseparable and symbiotic relationship. The author of Hebrews gives a definition of faith as follows:
“Now faith is the assurance of things hoped for, the conviction of things not seen.” Hebrews 11:1 (ESB)
In Romans 8, Paul uses this concept of “not seen” as he describes hope.
“For in this hope we were saved. Now hope that is seen is not hope. For who hopes for what he sees? But if we hope for what we do not see, with perseverance we wait eagerly for it.” Romans 8:24-25 (ESB)
NOTE: I will discuss Paul’s writings in Romans 8 in greater depth in a later chapter. There is also a triune relationship between faith, hope and love, but I will save that for the next book, Quantum Love.
Even the elves know that we are speaking of things not seen.
“Seeing isn’t believing; believing is seeing.” 
— The Santa Claus
I have seen the Grand Canyon, walked around the rim, taken photos, and bought something from the myriad of gift shops.  It does not take much conviction to assume it is real.  Ditto with the Statue of Liberty, Monument Valley, the Saturn V rocket, Disney World, and so on.  I did not witness the atomic explosion at Hiroshima (I was not born), the gunfight at the O.K. Corral, the third Crusade, the sack of Jerusalem, or the birth of Christ.  However, I have seen historical evidence that all these events occurred, and I do not need conviction to believe they did.
I have not seen (direct) evidence of the eternal life that Christ promised to believers.  I’ve heard about it, read about it, watched movies about it, but I have not seen it.  I have had a parent and in-laws die.  They had known Christ in a personal relationship, but I did not see them ascend to heaven.  In fact, the last time I saw them was either in an urn or in the ground.  Yet, I am convicted that they are living eternity with Christ—it is something I have hoped for them and for myself someday.  I am assured of this by faith.  I stated at the outset (in the preface) that belief is something we get from others, while faith is something we develop for ourselves.  That is not entirely accurate.  “So faith comes by hearing, and hearing by the word of Christ.” [2] (Romans 10:17, NASB) 
So, ‘seeing’ is not involved in developing faith.  Rather, it is directly linked to ‘hearing’ the Word of God.  Now, I submit to you that the most intellectual people in the world might read the Word of God, and never be moved by it, while a child might hear it—read it with the Spirit speaking to their soul—and have faith.
I am not quite sure I agree precisely with the elf in The Santa Claus, but too often, we look for evidence before we believe.  For me, I had to believe before I could see the evidence.  It was there right before me for years.  I read it, I studied it, and I dissected it.  Nevertheless, not until that ‘quantum leap’ of faith came about did I see it.  And quantum leap it was—just a tiny little bit, like a mustard seed.  I did not have an encounter with death.  I did not have any traumatic experience that drove me to faith.  In some sense, I just stopped trying to understand on my own.  You might call it a Holy Spirit encounter, but I don’t even remember feeling it.  One moment it was not there, the next moment it was.  I had merely said, “Lord, I give up.  I can’t do it on my own.”  Voilà, faith arrived.  In Quantum Phaith, I wrote about Principle 10c: “Truth can only be noticed when the private perspective is doubted”.  There was just too much of me in the way of my understanding.  I was looking for conviction in something I could see (the words), but missing the Word that was trying to assure me.
As I recently heard:
“Intimacy with God determines your clarity from God.”
— Pastor Daniel Rolfe 
2 Corinthians 4:1-6 says:
 1 Therefore, since through God’s mercy we have this ministry, we do not lose heart.  2 Rather, we have renounced secret and shameful ways; we do not use deception, nor do we distort the word of God.  On the contrary, by setting forth the truth plainly we commend ourselves to everyone’s conscience in the sight of God.  3 And even if our gospel is veiled, it is veiled to those who are perishing.  4 The god of this age has blinded the minds of unbelievers, so that they cannot see the light of the gospel that displays the glory of Christ, who is the image of God.  5 For what we preach is not ourselves, but Jesus Christ as Lord, and ourselves as your servants for Jesus’ sake.  6 For God, who said, “Let light shine out of darkness,” made his light shine in our hearts to give us the light of the knowledge of God’s glory displayed in the face of Christ. [6] (NIV)
Well now, if God’s Word—Christ—is not believable to you, then you have no hope in understanding it, no matter how educated you have become.  If His word is not clear to you, then perhaps you are not intimate enough with Him! 
And that’s all I have to say about that (for now)…
 
Chapter 1 Summary
Cristian faith is Quantum Phaith
Quantum Phaith is powerful in small quantities
Quantum Phaith is measureable
Quantum Phaith “the assurance of things hoped for, the conviction of things not seen”
Quantum Phaith is related to hope

 
 
What is Hope?
Secular Hope
Hope is the state which promotes the belief in a good outcome related to events and circumstances in one’s life [7]. Despair is often regarded as the opposite of hope. Hope is the “feeling that what is wanted can be had or that events will turn out for the best” or the act of “look[ing] forward to something with desire and reasonable confidence” or “feel[ing] that something desired may happen”. [8]
Hope is an optimistic attitude of mind based on an expectation of positive outcomes related to events and circumstances in one’s life or the world at large. As a verb, its definitions include: “expect with confidence” and “to cherish a desire with anticipation”. Among its opposites are dejection, hopelessness and despair. Here are some ways that “hope” is used [9]:
1. the feeling that what is wanted can be had or that events will turn out for the best: to give up hope. 
2. a particular instance of this feeling: the hope of winning. 
3. grounds for this feeling in a particular instance: There is little or no hope of his recovery. 
4. a person or thing in which expectations are centered: The medicine was her last hope. 
5. something that is hoped for: Her forgiveness is my constant hope.
In psychology
Dr. Barbara L. Fredrickson argues that hope comes into its own when crisis looms, opening us to new creative possibilities [10]. Frederickson argues that with great need comes an unusually wide range of ideas, as well as such positive emotions as happiness and joy, courage, and empowerment, drawn from four different areas of one’s self: from a cognitive, psychological, social, or physical perspective [11].
Hopeful people are “like the little engine that could, [because] they keep telling themselves “I think I can, I think I can” [12]. Such positive thinking bears fruit when based on a realistic sense of optimism, not on a naive “false hope” [13].
The psychologist C.R. Snyder linked hope to the existence of a goal, combined with a determined plan for reaching that goal [14]: Alfred Adler had similarly argued for the centrality of goal-seeking in human psychology [15], as too had philosophical anthropologists like Ernst Bloch [16]. Snyder also stressed the link between hope and mental willpower, as well as the need for realistic perception of goals [17], arguing that the difference between hope and optimism was that the former included practical pathways to an improved future [17]. He also considered that psychotherapy can help focus attention on one's goals, drawing on tacit knowledge of how to reach them [17].
Snyder’s proposed “Hope Scale” considered that a person's determination to achieve their goal is their measured hope. Snyder differentiates between adult-measured hope and child-measured hope. The adult Hope Scale by Snyder contains 12 questions; 4 measuring ‘pathways thinking’, 4 measuring ‘agency thinking’, and 4 that are simply fillers. Each subject responds to each question using an 8-point scale [18]. Fibel and Hale measure hope by combining Snyder’s Hope Scale with their own Generalized Expectancy for Success Scale (GESS) to empirically measure hope [19].
D. W. Winnicott saw a child’s antisocial behavior as expressing an unconscious hope for management by the wider society, when containment within the immediate family had failed [20]. Object relations theory similarly sees the analytic transference as motivated in part by an unconscious hope that past conflicts and traumas can be dealt with anew [21].
Mythology
Hope appears in ancient Greek mythology with the story of Zeus and Prometheus. Prometheus stole fire from the god Zeus, which infuriated the supreme god. In turn, Zeus created a box that contained all manners of evil, unbeknownst to the receiver of the box. Pandora opened the box after being warned not to, and those evils were released into the world; Hope, which lay at the bottom of the box, remained [22]. In Hesiod's Works and Days, the personification of hope is a spirit named Elpis.
As a literary concept
Norse mythology however considered Hope (Vön) to be the slobber dripping from the mouth of Fenris Wolf [23]: their concept of courage rated most highly a cheerful bravery in the absence of hope [24].
A classic reference to hope which has entered modern language is the concept that “Hope springs eternal” taken from Alexander Pope’s Essay on Man, the phrase reading “Hope springs eternal in the human breast, Man never is, but always to be blest:” [25] Another popular reference, "Hope is the thing with feathers," is from a poem by Emily Dickinson [26].
Hope can be used as an artistic plot device and is often a motivating force for change in dynamic characters. A commonly understood reference from western popular culture is the subtitle “A New Hope” from the original first installment (now considered Episode IV) in the Star Wars science fiction space opera [27]. The subtitle refers to one of the lead characters, Luke Skywalker, who is expected in the future to allow good to triumph over evil within the plot of the films.
Hinduism
In historic literature of Hinduism, hope is referred to with Pratidhi (Sanskrit: प्रतिधी) [28], or Apêksh (Sanskrit: अपेक्ष) [28] [29]. It is discussed with the concepts of desire and wish. In Vedic philosophy, karma was linked to ritual sacrifices (yajna), hope and success linked to correct performance of these rituals [30] [31]. In Vishnu Smriti, the image of hope, morals and work is represented as the virtuous man who rides in a chariot directed by his hopeful mind to his desired wishes, drawn by his five senses, who keeps the chariot on the path of the virtuous, and thus is not distracted by the wrongs such as wrath, greed, and other vices [32].
In the centuries that followed, the concept of karma changed from sacramental rituals to actual human action that builds and serves society and human existence [30] [32] - a philosophy epitomized in the Bhagavad Gita. Hope, in the structure of beliefs and motivations, is a long-term karmic concept. In Hindu belief, actions have consequences, and while one’s effort and work may or may not bear near term fruits, it will serve the good, that the journey of one’s diligent efforts (karma) and how one pursues the journey [31], sooner or later leads to bliss and moksha [30] [32] [33].
Christian Hope
According to the Holman Bible Dictionary, hope is a “[t]rustful expectation...the anticipation of a favorable outcome under God's guidance [34]. In the Pilgrim's Progress, it was Hopeful who comforted Christian in Doubting Castle; while conversely at the entrance to Dante's Hell were the words, "Lay down all hope, you that go in by me” [35]. Although these things are true about hope, hope is much more than these give credit.
Paul the Apostle, wrote of three virtues that together weave the fabric of our relationship with Christ. Although I will elaborate on this in a later chapter, Paul claims that Faith, Hope, and Love “abide, these three.” Though Paul goes to great length on the subject for our understanding, both in Corinthians 13 and Romans 8, he also admits that we only know of these things in part: 
“For we know in part and we prophesy in part, but when the perfect comes, the partial will pass away. … For now we see in a mirror dimly, but then face to face. Now I know in part; then I shall know fully, even as I have been fully known.” 1 Corinthians 13:9, 10, 12 (ESB)
Paul describes hope with seven different aspects in his writings. I will elaborate on them here.
Hope is a character trait
In Romans 4 and 5, Paul appears to describe hope as a character trait. That might be a little surprising when we look at its secular meaning. Here is what Paul says.
“In hope against hope he believed, so that he might become a father of many nations according to that which had been spoken, ‘SO SHALL YOUR DESCENDANTS BE.’” Romans 4:18 (ESB)
Here, hope seems to be something that is a part of Abraham’s fabric, and something that appears to cause a paradox for him, “in hope against hope.” When Paul continues to comment on hope in Romans 5, I think we can see the “character trait” aspect more clearly.
“Therefore, having been justified by faith, we have peace with God through our Lord Jesus Christ, through whom also we have obtained our introduction by faith into this grace in which we stand; and we exult in hope of the glory of God. And not only this, but we also exult in our tribulations, knowing that tribulation brings about perseverance; and perseverance, proven character; and proven character, hope;  and hope does not disappoint, because the love of God has been poured out within our hearts through the Holy Spirit who was given to us. For while we were still helpless, at the right time Christ died for the ungodly.”  Romans 5:1-6 (NASB) 
Of course, there is more to this passage than hope as a character trait, and there is also another connection between faith and hope revealed. Never the less, there is an aspect of hope woven into our character.
Hope is related to God’s glory
Paul paints the picture that hope is related to God’s glory in the passage we just examined.
“By whom also we have access by faith into this grace wherein we stand, and rejoice in hope of the glory of God.” Romans 5:2 (NASB)
Though not directly, Paul again places hope in the context of God’s glory in Romans 15:13, though here he actual describes God as the author of hope.
“Now may the God of hope fill you with all joy and peace in believing, so that you will abound in hope by the power of the Holy Spirit.” Romans 15:13 (NASB)
Hope is promised by God
Though Paul was probably not the author of Hebrews (it is very un-Pauline), there seems to be a Pauline influence in certain passages of Hebrews. It is commonly believed that Hebrews was penned by a colleague of the apostle Paul. In Hebrews 6, the author describes hope as something we have full assurance of—a promise perhaps.
“And we desire that each one of you show the same diligence so as to realize the full assurance of hope until the end,” Hebrews 6:11 (NASB)
The idea of hope as a promise is made more direct in Hebrews 10.
“Let us hold fast the confession of our hope without wavering, for He who promised is faithful;” Hebrews 10:23 (NASB)
Hope of salvation, eternal life
In 1 Thessalonians 5, Paul places hope in the context of salvation and in Titus 1 to eternal life, the result of salvation. Titus 1 also support the promise of hope. 
“But since we are of the day, let us be sober, having put on the breastplate of faith and love, and as a helmet, the hope of salvation.” 1 Thessalonians 5:8 (NASB)
“in the hope of eternal life, which God, who cannot lie, promised long ages ago” Titus 1:2 (NASB)
Hope is laid up in heaven, in the resurrection of Christ
Paul describes hope as something stored in heaven in Colossians 1 and Peter relates it specially to the resurrection of Christ in 1 Peter 1.
“We always thank God, the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, when we pray for you, because we have heard of your faith in Christ Jesus and of the love you have for all God's people— the faith and love that spring from the hope stored up for you in heaven and about which you have already heard in the true message of the gospel that has come to you.” Colossians 1:3-5 (ESB)
 “Blessed be the God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, who according to His great mercy has caused us to be born again to a living hope through the resurrection of Jesus Christ from the dead, to obtain an inheritance which is imperishable and undefiled and will not fade away, reserved in heaven for you,” 1 Pet 1:3-4 (NASB)
Hope is sure and steadfast
Again, the author of Hebrews, perhaps under a Pauline influence, describes hope as sure and steadfast, something quite different from the secular interpretation. Here hope is something tangible—more than a feeling.
“In the same way God, desiring even more to show to the heirs of the promise the unchangeableness of His purpose, interposed with an oath, so that by two unchangeable things in which it is impossible for God to lie, we who have taken refuge would have strong encouragement to take hold of the hope set before us. This hope we have as an anchor of the soul, a hope both sure and steadfast and one which enters within the veil, where Jesus has entered as a forerunner for us, having become a high priest forever according to the order of Melchizedek.” Hebrews 6:17-20  
Hope is a Person
Regardless of how the New Testament authors describe hope, Paul appears to personify hope in the person of Jesus Christ. Yes, I said hope is a person!
“Paul, an apostle of Christ Jesus by command of God our Savior and of Christ Jesus our hope,” 1 Timothy 1:1 (ESB)
“For the grace of God has appeared, bringing salvation for all people, training us to renounce ungodliness and worldly passions, and to live self-controlled, upright, and godly lives in the present age, waiting for our blessed hope, the appearing of the glory of our great God and Savior Jesus Christ, who gave himself for us to redeem us from all lawlessness and to purify for himself a people for his own possession who are zealous for good works.” Titus 2:11-13 (ESB)
“There is one body and one Spirit, just as also you were called in one hope of your calling; one Lord, one faith, one baptism, one God and Father of all who is over all and through all and in all.” Ephesians 4:4-6 (NASB)
I argued in Quantum Phaith that faith is a person, in part using this same passage and concept of one triune God—Spirit, Lord, and Father—comprising one faith, hope and baptism, all of which are personified.
 
Table 1 shows a comparison of secular hope and Christian hope.
Secular Hope	Christian Hope

A feeling	A character trait
Related to events and circumstances of one’s life	Related to God’s glory
May happen	Promised by God
Hope of winning, recovery, forgiveness, etc.	Hope of salvation, eternal life
Within one’s self or others	Laid up in heaven, in the resurrection of Christ
A possibility	Sure and steadfast
A concept	A Person

Quantum Hope
Quantum faith is a small amount of faith, barely enough for the non-Christian to fathom. Though it can be as the mustard seed, it is measureable. Measurability is the key to understanding faith. It is not some magical or imagined phenomenon, something that occurs to the delusional believer. Rather it is concrete.
“Now faith is the assurance of things hoped for, the conviction of things not seen.”
—Hebrews 11:1 (ESV)
Quantum hope is much the same, so obscure that it cannot be seen, but measureable. At the same time it is so big that we miss it with our limited capacity to understand: 
“For now we see in a mirror dimly, but then face to face. Now I know in part; then I shall know fully, even as I have been fully known.” 1 Corinthians 13:12 (ESB)
Thus, quantum hope is really the same as Christian Hope, and I will spend the remainder of our discourse trying to convince you of this fact and applying it to our walk in life.
The Story of Victor Marx
Victor Marx is an expert martial artist, former U.S. Marine, filmmaker and a sought after speaker. Victor is the founding director of the non-profit organization, All Things Possible (ATP), which works on a global scale to free children from abuse and the effects of its trauma. As an advocate and agent for the rescue and restoration of victimized children, Victor sheds a light on the silent epidemic of child abuse and reaches out to abused and wounded youth with his message of Hope. Victor is also a personal friend, but I met this amazing man not due to his fame, but due to his shame. If anyone living today was in need of quantum hope, it was Victor [36].
Born to an absentee father who was a pimp and a drug dealer; who didn't claim him as his own child, Victor Marx was left for dead in a cooler by a child molester at the age of 5 in the Deep South. By the time he was a teenager, Victor endured abuse from several step-fathers, attended 14 different schools and lived in 17 different houses. He was doing drugs in an effort to escape the emotional pain of his childhood. As an adult, Victor was diagnosed with mental illness and post-traumatic stress disorder. It seemed as if there was no way out. He could have chosen to remain a victim. Instead, he learned what it means to become victorious. Victor Marx travels the world as founder and President of ATP. Using his expertise as a 7th Degree Black Belt in Keichu-Do—a mixture of Karate and Jiu-Jitsu—and a 5th Degree in Weapons, Victor engages audiences of all types, delivering a powerful message of hope and restoration.
Victor and All Things Possible has brought quantum hope to incarcerated young people, victims of human trafficking, and people who are persecuted their religious beliefs in other parts of the world. Victor Marx has been called a “High Risk Missionary” by the Special Forces and intelligence community because of his passion to go and do where most would rather not.
 
Victor speaking to future ISIS terrorist—they only need hope

 
Chapter 2 Summary
Worldly hope is empty hope
Quantum hope is measureable but may be infinitesimal
Christian hope is quantum hope
Quantum hope is a character trait
Quantum hope is related to God’s glory
Quantum hope is promised by God
Quantum hope is hope of salvation, eternal life
Quantum hope is laid up in heaven, in the resurrection of Christ
Quantum hope is sure and steadfast
Quantum hope is a Person
 
A Journey into the infinitesimally small
Honey, I Shrunk the Kids!
“We're now a quarter of an inch tall, and 64 feet from the house. That's an equivalent of three-point-two miles. That's a long way. Even for a man of science.”
—Nick Szalinski
 
In Walt Disney Pictures, Honey, I Shrunk the Kids, Wayne Szalinski (Rick Moranis) is a preoccupied inventor who just can’t seem to get his electromagnetic shrinking machine to work. Then, when he accidentally shrinks his kids down to 1/4-inch tall and tosses them out in the trash, the real adventure begins! Now they face incredible dangers as they try to make their way home through the jungle of their own backyard: hurricane sprinklers, dive-bombing bees, a runaway lawn mower, and much, much more! Though I doubt they were concerned with bosons and top quarks, they probably could have used some help from the electromagnetic force.
In their microscopic condition, the Szalinski (Nick and Amy) and Thompson (Russ and Ron) kids knew they were in a different world. But in spite of their size, they could still not venture into the world of the subatomic. Hence, we will go there for them.
A Strange New World
I am now going to take you on a journey from the world you live in, though the microscopic and electron-microscopic worlds, to a place where things are unseen, but are yet measureable or quantifiable. Nick Szalinski understood scalability, and soon we will discover exactly what he experienced. Let’s first start with where we exist.
In our world, a meter is 100 meters or 1 meter (any number raised to the zeroth power is equal to 1). That sounds trivial, and it is, but we need a starting point, so let that be 1 meter or 3.28084 feet. At approximately 6 feet tall, I am 1.8288 meters tall (see Figure 1) [37].
 
Figure 1. Our world
A millimeter is 0.001 meters or 10-3.0 meters. A grain or sand of salt and a dust mite are smaller than a millimeter (see Figure 2). Inside a single millimeter we can pack a human egg, a paramecium, a silts particle and a strand of human hair and still have plenty of room.
 
Figure 2. Inside a millimeter
A thou is 0.001 inches or a thousandth of an inch. A mist droplet, a chloroplast, white and red blood cells are smaller than a thou. A twip is 1/20 of a typographical point. One twip is 1/1440 inch or 17.639 µm (microns). A micron is one millionth of a meter. A twip is the width of a silk fiber (see Figure 3). Wow, I really like to say twip as I write it.
 
Figure 3. Inside a Thou and a Twip
X Chromosomes and E. Coli live in a world smaller than a twip (see Figure 4). 
 
Figure 4. Inside a Twip
We have now traveled down to the level where the strongest optical microscope can still pick up images, like the HIV and Hepatitis B viruses (see Figure 5). 
 
Figure 5. Viruses and Ultraviolet Light waves
Our optical microscopes fail us at the level of DNA and a Phospholipid Bilayer (see Figure 6).
 
Figure 6. The sub-optic microscope level
A nanometer is 0.0000000001 meters or 10-9.0 meters. A Carbon Nanotude has a width of one nanometer, and the diameter of a Buckyball and length of an X-Ray wave are about that size (Figure 7).
 
Figure 7. The nanometer level
Water molecules and the carbon atom are smaller than a nanometer (See Figure 8).
 
Figure 8. Inside a nonometer
An angstrom, named after Anders Jonas Ångström, is 0.00000000001 meters or 10-10.0 meters. The smallest things still visible to a powerful electron microscope live just inside the Ångstrom level. Things like the hydrogen atom and Helium atom reside here (See Figure 9) 
The Femtometer is 0.0000000000000001 meters or 10-15.0 meters. You probably never heard this in your most advanced science class. It is about the size of neutrons and protons, sub-atomic particles that are the last things we can view with our electron microscope. These particles are examples of hadrons. We can’t see particles we presume to exist beyond these (see Figure 10). The fermi is named after the Italian physicist Enrico Fermi (1901–1954), one of the founders of nuclear physics.

 
Figure 9. The Ångstrom level
 
Figure 10. We know that the Femtometer level exist, but we cannot see it.
The Attometer is 0.0000000000000000001 meters or 10-18.0 meters. That is the size of an Up Quark or Down Quark. A what? A quark (pronounced ‘kwɑrk’) is an elementary particle and a fundamental constituent of matter. Quarks combine to form composite particles called hadrons, the most stable of which are protons and neutrons, the components of atomic nuclei. Due to a phenomenon known as color confinement, quarks are never directly observed or found in isolation; they can be found only within hadrons, such as baryons (of which protons and neutrons are examples), and mesons. For this reason, much of what is known about quarks has been drawn from observations of the hadrons themselves. Strangely enough, a Strange Quark is smaller (see Figure 11). We will talk more about Quarks when we discuss the Standard Model.
 
Figure 11. A Quarky world view
That tiny dot, barely visible inside the diameter of the Attometer, is a Top Quark (see Figure 12).
Yo! What is a Yoctometer? A yoctometer is equal to 0.000000000000000000000001 meters or 1.0-23.0 meters. That is about the diameter of a Neutrino (see Figure 13). A neutrino is an electrically neutral, weakly interacting elementary subatomic particle with half-integer spin (yes, I will explain this later on). The neutrino (meaning “little neutral one” in Italian) is denoted by the Greek letter ν (nu). All evidence suggests that neutrinos have mass but that their masses are tiny, even by the standards of subatomic particles.
 
Figure 12. A top Quark
Neutrinos do not carry any electric charge, which means that they are not affected by the electromagnetic force that acts on charged particles, such as electrons and protons. Neutrinos are affected only by the weak subatomic force, which is of much shorter range than electromagnetism, and gravity, which is relatively weak on the subatomic scale. Therefore, a neutrino typically passes through normal matter unimpeded.
It does not get any smaller than this. If you read Quantum Phaith, you may recall that quantum foam is where it all started (see Figure 14). When God said “Let there be light, or let there be Photons,” something very weird occurred. A photon is an elementary particle, the quantum of light and all other forms of electromagnetic radiation. It is the force carrier for the electromagnetic force, even when static via virtual photons. The effects of this force are easily observable at the microscopic and at the macroscopic level, because the photon has zero rest mass; this allows long distance interactions. Like all elementary particles, photons are currently best explained by quantum mechanics and exhibit wave–particle duality, exhibiting properties of waves and of particles. For example, a single photon may be refracted by a lens or exhibit wave interference with itself, but also act as a particle giving a definite result when its position is measured. 
 
Figure 13. A Neutrino
 
Figure 14. Quantum Foam
The Big Bang Theory
I do not endorse the following theory, I am just recounting it. The Big Bang Theory is the most widely accepted scientific theory to explain the early stages in the evolution of the Universe. For the first millisecond of the Big Bang, the temperatures were over 10 billion Kelvin and photons had mean energies over a million electron-volts. These photons were sufficiently energetic that they could react with each other to form pairs of electrons and positrons. Likewise, positron-electron pairs annihilated each other and emitted energetic photons:
γ + γ ↔ e^++ e^-
An equilibrium between electrons, positrons and photons was maintained during this phase of the evolution of the Universe. After 15 seconds had passed, however, the temperature of the universe dropped below the threshold where electron-positron formation could occur. Most of the surviving electrons and positrons annihilated each other, releasing gamma radiation that briefly reheated the universe.
For reasons that remain uncertain to Big Bang Theorists, during the process of leptogenesis there was an excess in the number of electrons over positrons. Hence, about one electron in every billion survived the annihilation process. This excess matched the excess of protons over antiprotons, in a condition known as baryon asymmetry, resulting in a net charge of zero for the universe. The surviving protons and neutrons began to participate in reactions with each other—in the process known as nucleosynthesis, forming isotopes of hydrogen and helium, with trace amounts of lithium. This process peaked after about five minutes. Any leftover neutrons underwent negative beta decay with a half-life of about a thousand seconds, releasing a proton and electron in the process,
n → p + e^-+ ν ̅_e
According to Big Bang Theorists, for about the next 300000–400000 years, the excess electrons remained too energetic to bind with atomic nuclei. What followed is a period known as recombination, when neutral atoms were formed and the expanding universe became transparent to radiation.
The Quantum Phaith Theory
It happened exactly like the Big Bang Theorist believe, with a few exceptions and caveats. First, there was a big bang, a very, very big bang—so big that if hearing had existed, it could been heard everywhere in the universe simultaneously. Here is how it happened:
“And God said, ‘Let there be light,’ and there was light.” Genesis 1:3 (ESB)
Bang! Allow me to rephrase that:
“And God said, ‘Let there be photons,’ and there were photons.” Genesis 1:3 (Jeff’s Non-Standard Version)
Bang!
Photons, which are Bosons, and electrons, which are Leptons, existed in Quantum Foam. Quantum foam (also referred to as space-time foam) is a concept in quantum mechanics devised by John Wheeler in 1955. The foam is supposed to be conceptualized as the foundation of the fabric of the universe.
Additionally, quantum foam can be used as a qualitative description of subatomic space-time turbulence at extremely small distances (on the order of the Planck length as shown in Figure 14). At such small scales of time and space, the Heisenberg Uncertainty Principle (I will explain that in Chapter 5) allows energy to briefly decay into particles and antiparticles and then annihilate without violating physical conservation laws. As the scale of time and space being discussed shrinks, the energy of the virtual particles increases. According to Einstein’s theory of general relativity, energy curves space-time. This suggests that—at sufficiently small scales—the energy of these fluctuations would be large enough to cause significant departures from the smooth space-time seen at larger scales, giving space-time a “foamy” character.
An electron can be bound to the nucleus of an atom by the attractive Coulomb force. A system of one or more electrons bound to a nucleus is called an atom. If the number of electrons is different from the nucleus' electrical charge, such an atom is called an ion. The wave-like behavior of a bound electron is described by a function called an atomic orbital. Each orbital has its own set of quantum numbers such as energy, angular momentum and projection of angular momentum, and only a discrete set of these orbitals exist around the nucleus. According to the Pauli Exclusion Principle (I will explain that in Chapter 6) each orbital can be occupied by up to two electrons, which must differ in their spin quantum number.
Electrons can transfer between different orbitals by the emission or absorption of photons with an energy that matches the difference in potential. Other methods of orbital transfer include collisions with particles, such as electrons, and the Auger effect. To escape the atom, the energy of the electron must be increased above its binding energy to the atom. This occurs, for example, with the photoelectric effect, where an incident photon exceeding the atom's ionization energy is absorbed by the electron.
So, when God said, “Let there be photons”, a big bang occurred as photons did their thing with electrons, and a spontaneous generation, called Creation, began. It happened just like the Big Bang Theorist theorized, with this exception: Time did not exist!
Recall that God is omnipresent, which means He exist outside of Time! Also, recall that omnipresent means He is everywhere all at the same time or He transcends time. Is that really possible? Of course it is, if you take that to mean He is infinite—that means unmeasurable, in essence. That implies—or is a fact for me—that everything, including the universe, is contained in God!
Time is our creation. I am sure the Bible says that somewhere. Oh yea! 2 Peter 3:8 says:
“But do not overlook this one fact, beloved, that with the Lord one day is as a thousand years, and a thousand years as one day.” (ESB)
That is a really cool way to say that a day and a thousand years are like the same thing to God. Mathematically that would be:
1 day = 1000 years IFF 1000 years = 1 day
IFF means if and only if, which is an impossible-to-decompose statement in math, thus my mathematical statement is fact! 
Thus, and therefore, and hence, all that Big Bang Stuff happened instantaneously. It did not take 15 seconds for a temperature change to occur—though it would in one of our time constrained laboratories. It did not take five minute for the nucleosynthesis process to peak. It did not take 300,000–400,000 years for the excess electrons to calm down enough to bind with atomic nuclei. In fact when all of this was completed, exactly ZERO milli-micro-nano-seconds (whatever that means) had elapsed, for time did not exist! Did I just assume away time and justify a young universe? No, God did! The poor Big Bang Theorist—who are really bright fellows—just cannot comprehend God. Neither can I and neither can Paul, for he saw in a mirror dimly.
“Now we see a blurred image in a mirror. Then we will see very clearly. Now my knowledge is incomplete. Then I will have complete knowledge as God has complete knowledge of me.” 1 Corinthians 13:12 (GOD’S WORD)
You see, what Plank, Heisenberg, Bohr, Pauli, and Einstein (I will introduce you to these gentlemen later) did was merely discover what God invented! God holds the patent on the universe, and Einstein merely recorded a portion of the patent when he worked in the Swiss Patent Office (that is where he wrote his four famous letters).
The rest of the creation story is told in Quantum Phaith. Actually, it is recorded in Genesis and Psalms and John and Colossians and so on, and I realize that is too many “ands”, but I am just too excited to control my grammar. I merely explained “scientifically” what God created.

Chapter 3 Summary 
We cannot see the smallest building block of creation, even with the aid of the most powerful microscope 
When God said, “Let there be light (photons)”, there was a very big bang! 
God is not constrained by time—time is man’s invention

 
 
Quantum Physics for Beginners
A Very Small Matter

“For now we  see in a mirror dimly, but then  face to face; now I know in part, but then I will know fully just as I also have been fully known.” [2] 
—1 Corinthians 13:12 (NASB)
“I want to know how God created this world.  I am not interested in this or that phenomenon, in the spectrum of this or that element; I want to know His thoughts; the rest are details.”
 —Albert Einstein
Uncovering Blind Spots
Science is exciting because it is always in trouble.  Wait a minute; I said that in Quantum Phaith. Well, it is worth saying again. No matter how excellent a theory is, it always misses some point or other.  Even our most precious ideas about the universe are not able to explain everything; there is always a blind spot.  When the hopeful folks zoom in on that blind spot it nearly always turns out to be a lot larger than anybody thought, and all of us are a mere bunch of naive beginners.
There is a book entitled The Blind Side that tells about the evolution of the Offensive Tackle’s key role in the National Football League (NFL), through the story of a young man named Michael Oher (pictured here [37]) who started playing football at the Briarcrest Christian School.  Another football player, named Lawrence Julius Taylor, played his entire professional career as a linebacker for the New York Giants in the NFL.  
The Giants headed into the 1985 season with a sense of optimism, after their successful 1984 campaign and a 5–0 pre-season record.  The Giants went 10–6, and Taylor spearheaded a defense that led the NFL in sacks with 68. [38] Taylor had 13 sacks.  One of the more memorable plays of his career occurred during this season.  On a Monday Night Football game against the Redskins, Taylor's sack of Redskins quarterback Joe Theismann inadvertently resulted in a compound fracture of Theismann’s right leg.  Taylor had approached Theismann on his blind side, and was not picked up by the left tackle.  At the time, the quarterback was one of the highest paid athletes in American football.  Taylor changed this!  Suddenly, the left tackle position was very critical to a successful quarterback.  Michael Oher would be highly recruited to protect the quarterback’s blind side, at the left tackle position.  Quarterbacks now required something external to their own senses and athletic ability—they needed a left tackle to cover their blind spot!
At the end of the eighteenth century, the blind spot of regular mechanics (the library of dogmas that teach the ins and outs of objects moving and colliding) was the behavior of very small objects, such as electrons, and the behavior that light caused when it hit small things like electrons.
Light had been a mystery for centuries.  Some experiments proved beyond the shadow of a doubt that light was waves.  Some other experiments proved beyond the shadow of a doubt that light was particles.  The truth about light was obviously hidden and it was not until 1900 that people began to understand that there was something very weird about the world of the small.  It was something that required a complete revision of understanding.
It was decided that the world of the very small was governed by rules that were different from the rules that governed the world we can see, and regular (or classical) physics begat Quantum Physics.  And that unanticipated breach in mechanics spawned this very important principle:
 
Principle (1): 
Individual quantum particles are subjected to a completely different law than the law to which large objects made from quantum particles are subjected.

The introduction of the quantum
The Quantum Mechanical era commenced in 1900, when Max Planck postulated that everything is made up of little particles he called quanta (one quantum; two quanta).  Matter had its quanta but also the forces that kept material objects together.  Forces could only come in little steps at the time; there was no more such thing as ‘infinitely small’.
Albert Einstein  (pictured here [37]) took matters further when he successfully described how light interacts with electrons, but it wasn't until the 1920's that things began to fall together, and some fundamental rules about the world of the small where wrought almost by pure thought.  The men who mined these rules were the arch beginners of Quantum Physics (Mechanics), the ‘Breakfast Club’ of the modern era.  Names like Pauli, Heisenberg, Schrödinger, Born, Rutherford and Bohr still put butterflies in the bellies of those of us who know what incredible work these ‘boys’ achieved—as most of them where in their twenties; they were rebels, most of them not even taken seriously.  They were Europeans, struck by the depression, huddled together in tiny attics peeking into a strange new world as once the twelve spies checked out the Promised Land.  Let all due kudos abound.
Believing the unbelievable
One of the toughest obstacles the early Quantum Mechanic explorers had to overcome was their own beliefs in determinism.  Because the world of the small is so different, people had to reformat the system of logic that had brought them thus far.  In order to understand nature they had to let go of their intuition and embrace a completely new way of thinking.  The things they discovered where fundamental rules that just were, and could not really be explained in terms of the large-scale world.  Just like water is wet and fire is hot, quantum particles display behaviors that are inherent to them alone and cannot be compared with any material object we can observe with the naked eye.
One of those fundamental rules is that everything is made up from little bits.  Material objects are made up of particles, but also the forces that keep those objects together.  For instance, light is, besides that bright stuff which makes things visible, also a force (the so-called electromagnetic force) that keeps electrons tied to the nuclei of atoms, and atoms tied together to make molecules and finally objects.  Scripture often refers to Jesus as light, and most exegeses focus on the metaphorical value of these statements.  However, as we realize that all forms of matter are in fact ‘solidified’ light (energy, as in E=mc^2) and the electromagnetic force holds all atoms together, the literal value of Paul's statement "and He is before all things, and in Him all things hold together” (Col 1:17) becomes quite compelling.
Either particles are so-called real particles, also known as fermions, or they are force particles, also known as bosons.  Gluons, which are bosons, bind together by quarks, which are fermions.  Quarks and gluons form nucleons, and nucleons bound together by gluons form the nuclei of atoms.
The electron, which is a fermion, is bound to the nucleus by photons, which are bosons.  The whole conglomerate together forms atoms.  Atoms form molecules.  Molecules form objects.
Everything that we can see, from the most distant stars to the girl next door, or this page you are staring at and yourself as well are made up from a mere 3 fermions and 9 bosons.  The three fermions are up-quark, down-quark and the electron.  The nine bosons are eight gluons and one photon.  Like so:
 
Nevertheless, the three fermions that make up our entire universe are not all there is.  These three are the survivors of a large family of elementary particles, and we now know this family as the Standard Model.  What happened to the rest?  Will they ever be revived?
For the most part, our character, our very souls, have missing pieces. Sin did that when it entered the world, and the image that we once reflected, the image of God, we no longer possess it in pure form. What are we missing? Neither Paul nor I can tell you that (for we see in a mirror dimly), except I am sure we are missing quantum love, and only by the indwelling of the Spirit can quantum love be manifested in us. But, in general, the things that we are missing are those that separate us from God. Thus, quantum hope becomes a necessity.
 
We will take a look at what the elementary particles are, the forces they generate and in which weird world they live.
Breaches in symmetry
Imagine having your eyes closed and somebody gives you two objects—two cubes, 1 and 2—in your hands.  The two cubes are identical in shape and you understand the two cubes to be similar; you would only need one definition to describe both objects.	 
Then you open your eyes and one cube appears to be light gray while the other is darker (1a and 2a).  Now the two objects are different and you would need two definitions to describe them.	 
When you had your eyes closed, the two objects were the same.  We speak of symmetry.  When you open your eyes, the symmetry breaches and you have two different objects.
Now imagine that you do not have eyes.  Nobody has eyes.  Mother Nature has not yet produced eyes.  In fact, she has not produced any way to determine the difference between the two cubes.  That means that the difference between the two cubes is not yet part of reality, and in a way that sits on a ‘very slippery slope’, we can say that the difference between the two cubes does not exist.  Then Mother Nature comes up with eyes to see and in their wake lays the difference between the two cubes.  In that same slippery way, we can say that when nature produces a way to discern differences, these differences are produced along with it.  That is how it went in The Beginning.
According the most plausible theories, the universe commenced in a condition of complete symmetry; we would only need one definition to describe this initial condition.  That definition is often called the Grand Unification Theory  (GUT) and it is still unknown to humankind.  In other words, we know that the universe commenced as a singularity but we have no idea how that would translate into understandable mathematics. In order to do so require GUT.
The various fundamental particles popped out of the quantum foam and, apart from their masses, their differences were not discernible, because there was only one force at work in the universe.  Imagine having only one sense, like the tactile sense with which we identified the cubes at first.  The cube is there, or it is not.  No further details can be observed.  Right after The Beginning, all particles responded to the one and only force and there was no way to identify inherent differences, and so there were none.  In retrospect, we call this force the Grand Unified Force  (GUF); only because we know its symmetry was bound to breach; and when it did, there came to be two forces: gravity and the strong-electro-weak force.
Now particles responded to gravity by means of their mass or amount of energy, or they responded by means of their strong-electro-weak charge; and the breaching went on.
The strong-electro-weak force spawned the strong nuclear force and the electro-weak force.  This caused two major groups of fundamental particles to be identified: quarks that responded to all three existing forces and leptons that did not respond to the strong nuclear force.  In our tactile/visual analogy of the cubes, leptons would be those particles that we can feel but not see, while quarks are particles that we can feel and see.  This caused a significant change in particles dynamics.  In addition, because quarks are generally more massive than leptons, we speak of the ‘mass-dominated era’.
The final breach in symmetry happened when the electro-weak force broke apart into the electromagnetic force and the weak force.  This breach in symmetry only marked a further difference in the lepton-tribe.  Those leptons that had electromagnetic charge followed electromagnetism (EM), and those leptons that did not have electromagnetic charge (the neutrinos) did not follow electromagnetism. 
The four forces of nature
When the era of symmetry breaches ended, there were four forces, and those four identified all the various differences between the existing fundamental particles:
 
Force	Boson	Function	Range
Gravity
Graviton	Gravity curves space.  It always attracts, never repels.  Gravity is the only force to which all particles are subjected.	Indefinite
Strong Force	Gluon (8 kinds)	The strong force binds quarks into nucleons and nucleons into nuclei.
Limited to the atomic nucleus

Electromagnetism (EM)	Photon	Electromagnetism binds electrons to the nucleus.  By doing so, electromagnetism allows all physical and chemical processes to happen.	Indefinite
Weak Force	Weak bosons
(3 kinds)	The weak force causes unstable particles and nuclei to decay.
Limited to the atomic nucleus


The particles
As stated before, we can divide material particles into three fundamental groups: 
	bosons , which are bits of force, not real particles; 
	quarks, which are electrically charged, either positive or negative, and which form atomic nucleons that contains most of the mass of the visible universe; and 
	leptons which either have a negative electrical charge or no charge at all (in which case they are called neutrino's, and which make the universe a lively place in which a lot more happens than simply bumping into each other.
There are 12 quarks and 12 leptons although some demand that there is only six of each.  In fact, there is six of each and each has an anti-particle--six of each plus six anti-of-each.  However, because particles have only a handful of characteristics, a reversed electrical charge (which defines an anti-particle) alters the nature of a particle by such a big percentage that most feel confident to speak of 12 different particles of each kind, even though there is a strong kinship between six pairs.  So, here is the Standard Model in its fullness but keep in mind that every quark and lepton has an anti-quark or anti-lepton that is just as real and corporeal as the normal sibling it was named after (electron and anti-electron or positron; down quark and anti-down, etc.).
Of the lepton bunch you should know that every charged one has a sibling that is not charged, called a neutrino. 
Principle (2)
The Standard Model (SM) Theory of particle physics provides a framework for explaining chemistry and nuclear physics (low energy processes).  It additionally provides an explanation for sub-nuclear physics and some aspects of cosmology in the earliest moments of the universe (high energy processes).

Also, note all qualities of the particles are listed here; and the graviton is usually not listed in the Standard Model because gravity is negative energy while all other energy is positive.  It is not very complicated, but read Kip Thorne's Black Holes and Time Warps [39] if you want to know more.
There is a force that binds quantum faith (Phaith) to quantum love, and that force is quantum hope. In our schema, quantum hope is that force, and it is reflected in the electromagnetic force. However, we saw in Quantum Phaith that Christ is the electromagnetic force. Is there a contradiction? Certainly not, for recall that hope (quantum hope) is above all else a Person: Christ. That might be weird, except that Paul tells us in Colossians that Christ holds all things together, including faith and love. 
The Standard Model :
Name	Mass 	Charge
Quarks
	
Up	10 	1/3
Down	2012	-1/3
Charm	313112	2/3
Strange	352***	-1/3
Top	35225012	2/3
Bottom	880612	-1/3
Leptons		
Electron	1	-1
E-neutrino
Almost 0	0
Muon	207	-1
Mu-neutrino
Almost 0	0
Tau	3466	-1
Tau-neutrino
Almost 0	0
Bosons		
Photon (EM)	0	0
Z^0 (WF)	178450	0
W^+ (WF)	157104	1
W^- (WF)	157104	-1
Gluon (SF)	012	0
	The evolution of the Standard Model over time:

 
	The evolution of the Standard Model over time

History of particle physics 
The idea that matter is composed of elementary particles dates to at least the 6th century BC.  The ancient Greek philosophers Leucippus, Democritus, and Epicurus studied the philosophical doctrine of ‘atomism’.  Although in the 17th century Isaac Newton thought tiny particles made up all matter, John Dalton formally stated, in 1802, that tiny atoms made up everything. 
Dmitri Mendeleev's first periodic table, in 1869, helped cement the view, prevalent throughout the 19th century, that matter was made of atoms.  Work by J. J. Thomson established that atoms are composed of light electrons and massive protons.  Ernest Rutherford established that the protons are concentrated in a compact nucleus.  The nucleus was initially thought to be composed of protons and confined electrons (in order to explain the difference between nuclear charge and mass number), but was later found to be composed of protons and neutrons. 
The 20th century explorations of nuclear physics and quantum physics, culminating with proofs of nuclear fission and nuclear fusion, gave rise to an active industry of generating one atom from another, even rendering possible (although not profitable) the transmutation of lead into gold.  These theories successfully predicted nuclear weapons. 
Throughout the 1950s and 1960s, a bewildering variety of particles was found in scattering experiments.  This was referred to as the "particle zoo".  Scientists deprecated this term after the formulation of the Standard Model, during the 1970s, in which they explained the large number of particles as combinations of a (relatively) small number of fundamental particles.


Chapter 4 Summary
Quanta, which are tiny little particles, make up everything. 
Small particles are completely different animals than large objects—a completely different law governs them than the law to that controls large objects.
The visible universe is made up of 3 fermions and 9 bosons (not counting gravity) 
The Standard Model includes all elementary particles and forces, except gravity.
The matter that makes up the visible universe is part of a larger family of particles called the Standard Model.  
The universe commenced in a condition of complete symmetry.
There are four elementary forces in nature: Gravity, Electromagnetism, Strong Force and Weak Force.
We can divide material particles into three fundamental groups: bosons, quarks and leptons.
The Standard Model (SM) Theory of particle physics provides a framework for explaining chemistry and nuclear physics (low energy processes).
Quantum hope is the electromagnetic force.

 
 
I am Certain about My Uncertainty 
He said to them, "It is not for you to know times or epochs which the Father has fixed by His own authority;" [40] 
-Acts 1:7 (NASB) 
However, of that day or hour no one knows, not even the angels in heaven, nor the Son, but the Father alone. [40] 
-Mark 13:32 (NASB) 
Wherefore I was grieved with that generation, and said, They do always err in their heart; and they have not known my ways. [41] 
-Hebrews 3:10 (KJV)
Quantum theory provides us with a striking illustration of the fact that we can fully understand a connection though we can only speak of it in images and parables.
- Werner Heisenberg
A Very Scary Word
Uncertainty can be a very scary word, and yet we all deal with uncertainties. We are uncertain about the health of our aging parents. We are uncertain how our children will turn out. We are uncertain of the world our teenagers will be entering. We are uncertain about the economy, our careers, our retirement plans and so on. Yes, uncertainty can be scary
We Need to be Certain
In this world where uncertainty plagues us, we need something that is certain. For my family that something is Deer Valley Ranch (DVR) . Yea, I know, that seems really weird, but the weirdness get weirder. We started going to DVR in summer 2007. Here’s the weirder part, it is a “dude ranch”. And the ultimate of weirdness is we went there for our 20th wedding anniversary, and took the kids.
But, DVR became a constant, a certainty, in an uncertain world. This past summer was our ninth consecutive summer at DVR. There we build memories for our girls and fellowship with friends that we see once a year (usually). We also ride horses, hike, eat (meals are a large part of the experience), worship and drink hot chocolate around a campfire.
Our girls cry when we have to leave, and I must confess my allergies flare up quite a bit. After we leave, we can only think of next summer, and the idea of going back to DVR sustains us for the year. So, DVR provide us with a little certainty, and everyone needs something like DVR.
The Uncertainty Principle
A scientific model or theory is supposed to be a cascade of certainties, and whenever someone uses the word 'uncertainty' most scientists will run for the nearest airlock.
Great, therefore, was the consternation when uncertainty appeared to be one of the most characteristic qualities of quantum particles.  Einstein even went as far as to boldly state: “I don't believe that God plays dice!”
But God did.  Or so it seemed.
The year was 1927 when a brilliant 26 year old German named Werner Karl Heisenberg  (pictured here [38]) postulated a principle that would go down in history as the Uncertainty Principle of Heisenberg . It goes like this: 
A large object that moves along a trajectory has, at any point in time, a certain speed and a certain position.  Both speed and position for any point along the track can be accurately calculated or measured.  Yet one cannot accurately know both the speed and position of a quantum particle that zips through space.  Either we know the position of the particle or its speed.  In addition, when we know one of the two accurately, the other one ‘hides’.  When we know the speed, we have no idea where the particle is situated.  Moreover, when we know the position of the particle, we are oblivious to its speed.  That is not because we are not smart enough, or our instruments are not accurate enough.  It (either speed or position) simply does not exist!  
Heisenberg’s principle implies that it is impossible to simultaneously both measure the present position while “determining” the future momentum of an electron or any other particle with an arbitrary degree of accuracy and certainty.  This is not a statement about researchers’ ability to measure one quantity while determining the other quantity.  Rather, it is a statement about the laws of physics.  That is, one cannot define a system to measure, simultaneously, one value while determining the future value of these pairs of quantities.  That is, the quantum space in which a particles momentum and position can be measured does not exist—okay, that’s weird, but things at the quantum level occur at the speed of light.
Principle (3a):
The Uncertainty Principle of Heisenberg: One cannot know, simultaneously, the speed and position a quantum particle.
We like to think of speed and position as two separate things but in fact, they are two sides of one thing.  Just like space and time are really not two but one: space-time.  Einstein was right when he said that God does not play dice.  He doesn't.  Instead, He created the universe on a principle of sovereignty.  Quantum particles are allowed to surround themselves with mere blurs of their intentions.  No one is to know their true speed-position, not even God, because it—speed-position—does not exist and the quantum level, and that is weird.
Historical Introduction
Werner Heisenberg formulated the uncertainty principle at Niels Bohr's institute in Copenhagen, while working on the mathematical foundations of quantum mechanics.
In 1925, following pioneering work with Hendrik Kramers, Heisenberg developed matrix mechanics, which replaced the ad-hoc old quantum theory with modern quantum mechanics.  The central assumption was that the classical motion was not precise at the quantum level, and electrons in an atom did not travel on sharply defined orbits.  Rather, the motion was smeared out in a strange way: the Fourier transform of time only involved those frequencies that could be seen in quantum jumps.
Heisenberg's paper did not admit any unobservable quantities like the exact position of the electron in an orbit at any time; he only allowed the theorist to talk about the Fourier components of the motion.  Since the Fourier components were not defined at the classical frequencies, they could not be used to construct an exact trajectory, so that the formalism could not answer certain overly precise questions about where the electron was or how fast it was going.  The most striking property of Heisenberg's infinite matrices for the position and momentum is that they do not commute. 
In March 1926, working in Bohr's institute, Heisenberg realized that the non-commutativity implies the uncertainty principle.  This was a clear physical interpretation for the non-commutativity, and it laid the foundation for what became we now call as the Copenhagen interpretation of quantum mechanics.  Heisenberg showed that the commutation relation implies an uncertainty, or in Bohr's language a complementarity. [43] Any two variables that do not commute cannot be measured simultaneously—the more precisely one is known, the less precisely the other can be known.
One way to understand the complementarity between position and momentum is by wave-particle duality.  If a particle described by a plane wave passes through a narrow slit in a wall like a water-wave passing through a narrow channel, the particle diffracts and its wave comes out in a range of angles.  The narrower the slit, the wider the diffracted wave is and the greater the uncertainty in momentum afterwards.
The Famous Slot Experiment
Quantum-uncertainty has a very peculiar consequence.  One cannot predict where a particle will end up when we shoot it at a target.  Particles are sovereign and cannot be coerced.
Look at the following diagram of the one slot apparatus: 
 
A particle canon shoots particles at a screen with a slot.  Behind the first screen, we place a recording screen that marks the place of particles impact with a black dot through the slot.  We let the experiment run for a couple of hours, or at least long enough to have fair coverage of possibilities.
If particles were regular objects they would have been easily directed onto the same spot on the recording screen.  However, particles are not regular objects and our recording screen shows a blurred black smudge at the spot we were aiming at.
Obviously most particles hit the recording screen somewhere near our target.  Particles cannot be coerced but they seem nevertheless quite willing to join the fun.
 
Simulated particle hits as might be depicted by the recording screen in the single slot experiment	Yet the black blur does not have a boundary.  It smudges across the entire recording screen, graying out radially until at the edges hardly any impact shows.  It appears that some particles chose to avoid the mainstream and steer for the edge.  In fact, if we had placed recording screens all around the canon, we would have seen impacts everywhere, even behind the canon!  Some particles simply tear a U-turn and hit a wall 180 degrees opposite the one we were shooting at.
We decide to count the number of impacts directly behind the slot in an area with a certain small radius.  Then we count again but cover a larger area.  We count more hits of course, because we have added surface to the first count.  Then we count repeatedly until we have a good picture of the spread of particles.  We plot the numbers in a graph and find a curve that never becomes zero (since particles hit everywhere).  This curve was plotted for the first time in 1925 by an Austrian named Erwin Schrödinger  and has been called the Schrödinger Wave ever since.
Eψ=H ̂ψ (Time-independent Schrödinger Wave Equation)
 
(a) 1s electrons (meaning that both electrons are roughly the same distance away from the nucleus) can be "found" anywhere in this solid sphere, centered on the nucleus.  (b) The electron density map plots the points where electrons could be.  The higher density of dots indicates the physical location in which the electron cloud is most dense.  (c) Electron density (Ψ^2) is shown as a function of distance from the nucleus (r) as a graphical representation of the same data used to generate figure b.  (d) The total probability of finding an electron is plotted as a function of distance from the nucleus (r).
Erwin Schrödinger (pictured here [38]) solved the troublesome particle/wave duality paradox that had plagued scientists for so long.  The question of whether things, such as photons, were waves or particles was answered with a loud negation across the board: they are neither, or rather: both!  Quantum particles are particles that propagate through space by means of chance-waves.  Some scientists had detected that wave.  This wave does not propagate through some kind of medium, like water or air, but emerges from the individual sovereignty of quantum particles.  Before quantum theory, waves always ran through a medium, like the ocean.  Take away the wave and you still have water.  A quantum wave does not use a medium; it uses chance.  Take away the wave (which are the particles) and you will be left with nothing.  He is also noted for his so-called Thought Experiment, commonly referred to a Schrödinger’s Cat (see box below).
The Famous Two Slots Experiment 
If quantum particles that burst forth from their source behaving like a wave, we should be able to observe interference.
Interference happens when two waves collide and some parts of both waves cancel out and other parts add up.  (To construct a resultant-wave we add up the amplitudes of both waves for all points - above the gray line is positive, below is negative).	 
 
To make two waves in order for them to interfere we take out the slotted screen of our previous experiment and insert a screen with two slots.
We fire at will, and wouldn't you know... interference!  Indeed many particles ride the wave of their identity.  But!  We are not happy so fast.  We decide to fire off one particle at a time with an interval of one minute between particles.  Quantum particles are those things that cannot be divided.
Particles must go through one of the two slots, our intuition dictates.  Firing off particles one at a time should not produce an interference pattern, we think.
A few hours later we return, and find the recording screen adorned with … yep! ... an interference pattern.  How is this possible?
Well, apparently we have stumbled upon the heart of quantum weirdness.  The rule is easily derived, but not easily swallowed.  We will have to choke it down.  Quantum particles are per definition indivisible, but they travel through space according to all the many possibilities from which they have to choose.  They are not compelled to choose one specific trajectory, rather they are allowed to travel all of them, according to the chance that they will. 
Schrödinger's Cat
Schrödinger's thought experiment was intended as a discussion of the Einstein-Podolsky-Rosen (EPR) article, named after its authors—Einstein, Podolsky, and Rosen—in 1935. [43] The EPR article had highlighted the strange nature of quantum entanglement:
 
A quantum state that is a combination of the states of two systems (for example, two subatomic particles), that once interacted but then separated, are not each in a definite state.  The Copenhagen Interpretation implies that the state of the two systems undergoes collapse into a definite state when one of the systems is measured.  Schrödinger and Einstein had exchanged letters about Einstein's EPR article.  In the course this dialog, Einstein had pointed out that, the state of an unstable keg of gunpowder will contain, after a while, a superposition of both exploded and unexploded states.
To illustrate further the incompleteness of quantum mechanics, Schrödinger describes how one could transpose, in principle, the superposition of an atom to large-scale systems of a live and dead cat by coupling cat and atom with the help of a "diabolical mechanism".  He proposed a scenario with a cat in a sealed box, wherein the cat's life or death was dependent on the state of a subatomic particle.  According to Schrödinger, the Copenhagen Interpretation implies that the cat remains both alive and dead (to the universe outside the box) until the box is opened.
Schrödinger did not wish to promote the idea of dead-and-alive cats as a serious possibility; quite the reverse, the paradox is a classic reductio ad absurdum. [44] The thought experiment serves to illustrate the bizarreness of quantum mechanics and the mathematics necessary to describe quantum states.  Intended as a critique of just the Copenhagen Interpretation (the prevailing orthodoxy in 1935), the Schrödinger cat thought experiment remains a topical touchstone for all interpretations of quantum mechanics.  How each interpretation deals with Schrödinger's cat is often used as a way of illustrating and comparing each interpretation's particular features, strengths, and weaknesses.

 Particles will travel everywhere from source to target, like a smear, thick where the particle is most likely to be, and thin where it is most likely not to be.  The smear by which they travel is called a path integral:  the total area covered by all possible trajectories.
Interpretation

In the two-slot experiment the following is true:
The chance that the particle goes through slot 1 is x-percent.  The chance that the particle goes through slot 2 is y-percent.  Chance x and chance y are both Schrödinger-waves and they will engage each other to form an interference pattern behind the two slots.
Quantum particles are indivisible; however, they will interfere with themselves to form complex patterns when they encounter obstacles.  When we repeat the experiment, we will find the same results: approximately the same number of particles hit in certain areas.  Uncertainty appears to have its certainties after all.  Or ..., does it?
What if we shoot one hundred particles at a target and the first ninety-nine of them 'choose' to fit the pattern.  Then, if certainty existed, the hundredth particle would be forced to land in the only spot left by its predecessors.  No so!  There is no way of telling where the hundredth particle will go.  The last one's freedom will always infringe ultimate certainty.
The more particles we fire off the more accurate we can predict how the spread of particles will be.  If we shoot off a million particles, we can quite accurately predict the percentage of hits per area.  If we shoot off a hundred particles, we can still predict how the spread will be but not very accurately.  And if we shoot off one particle, we cannot make any sound prediction where it will end up.  All we can talk about is the chance that our particle will end up in a certain area.
If 95% of one million particles ends up in a radius of 50 centimeter from the projected heart of the slot we can say that there is a 95% chance that particle number one-million-and-one will end up in the same area.  But, this says nothing about the actual destination of the particle.
Principle (3b):
A large number of particles will display a pattern that is near equal to the initial possibilities of a single particle.
A quantum particle cannot be coerced.  If it chooses to do so, it will end up there where only 1% of the particles ended up.  It might even boldly go where no particle has gone before.  Nothing is certain.  Everything is possible.
This brings us to another phenomenon: quantum tunneling, which allows a quantum to simply up-and-leave and show up somewhere else.  In fact, there is a very real yet astronomically small chance that all particles that make up you and this book suddenly decide to zip to Mars.  The chance that this happens naturally is so small that we do not incorporate it in our daily experience of reality.  But, it is certainly not zero.  Quantum tunneling is a very real thing, like say electricity.
Before electricity was comprehended and harnessed by man, all natural manifestation of it (lightning, static electricity, magnetism) must have seemed miraculous and magical, but nowadays we don't think twice about an illuminating light bulb.  It is the same with quantum tunneling.  If the principle is understood and a pact is sealed with the world of the small, large objects such as a human being may be freely transported instantaneously over great distances; like Philip in Acts 8:39, or the disciples in John 6:21.  No magic.  No super natural goings on.  Just a utilization of one of nature's freely available principles.
Still, even particle sovereignty is limited.  Freedom seems to be something that exists between borders.  Freedom has its parameters after all.
I am Certain of my Uncertainty
Uncertainty does not, in quantum physics, mean we do not know. Rather, it means we do not know it all. We can know one aspect of a subatomic object without knowing another aspect of the same object.
I am certain about quantum hope. I am certain that it is measureable. Yet there exists a bit of uncertainty as well. However, there is a difference between being uncertain and unsure in quantum physics. As we have seen, uncertainty is an underlying principle of subatomic particles—we are sure of of it! And so with quantum hope I am uncertain, but I am sure of it.
As we will see in the coming chapters, quantum hope is gradually revealed in Scripture, so that like particles will display a pattern that is near equal to the initial possibilities of a single particle. We will also see that quantum hope (and quantum faith) is based on rational thought! But first, we must visit a Hobbit…

Summary 5
Freedom is the most fundamental principle of the universe 
The Uncertainty Principle: Speed and position of a quantum cannot be simultaneously known 
Quanta move along according to the chance that they do, and can interfere with themselves. 
A large number of particles will display a pattern that is near equal to the initial possibilities of a single particle.
Amid uncertainty, quantum hope is certain, even though it is unobservable.

 
Wizards, Elves, Dwarves, Little People and Atoms
“Where there's life there's hope, and need of vittles.”
― J.R.R. Tolkien, The Lord of the Rings

The Fellowship of the Ring and Hope
The Lord of the Rings is a book by J.R.R. Tolkien, the sequel to his earlier work, The Hobbit. It was published in three volumes in 1954 and 1955. 
The story’s titular character is the Dark Lord Sauron of Mordor. The primary villain of the work, he created the One Ring to control nineteen other Rings of Power, and is thus the “Lord of the Rings.” Sauron, in turn, was the servant of an earlier Dark Lord, Morgoth (Melkor), who is prominent in Tolkien’s The Silmarillion, the history of Middle-earth. 
 
J. R. R. Tolkien once described The Lord of the Rings as “a fundamentally religious and Catholic work” he wrote to his friend, the English Jesuit Father Robert Murray, “unconsciously so at first, but consciously in the revision.” (The Letters of J.R.R. Tolkien, 142). There are many theological themes underlying the narrative, the battle of good versus evil, the triumph of humility over pride, the activity of Grace, Death and Immortality, Resurrection, Salvation, Repentance, Self-Sacrifice, Free Will, Humility, Justice, Fellowship, Authority and Healing. In it the great virtues of Mercy and Pity (shown by Bilbo and Frodo  towards Gollum ) win the day and the message from the Lord’s Prayer “And lead us not into temptation, but deliver us from evil” was very much on Tolkien’s mind as Frodo struggled against the power of the One Ring (Letters, 181 and 191). 
In the Fellowship of the Ring, a band of unlikely characters carry the hope of middle earth on a nearly impossible quest to enter the land of Mordor to destroy the ring in the Mountain of Doom. Thus Wizard, Man, Elf, Dwarf, and Hobbit form the fellowship. But of the party, only two will complete the journey to the heart of Mordor: Frodo Baggins and Samwise Gamgee . 
The Plot (the book), Not the Movie
Thousands of years before the events of the novel, the Dark Lord Sauron had forged the One Ring to rule the other Rings of Power and corrupt those who wear them: the leaders of Men, Elves and Dwarves. He was later vanquished in battle by an alliance of Elves and Men led by Elendil and Gil-galad. Isildur, a ruler of Men, cut the One Ring from Sauron's finger, claiming it as an heirloom for his line, and Sauron lost his physical form. When Isildur was later ambushed and killed by Orcs, the Ring was lost in the River Anduin at Gladden Fields.
Over two thousand years later, the Ring was found by one of the river-folk called Déagol. His friend Sméagol immediately fell under the Ring's influence and strangled Déagol to acquire it. Sméagol was banished and hid under the Misty Mountains, where the Ring extended his lifespan and transformed him over the course of hundreds of years into a twisted, corrupted creature called Gollum. He lost the Ring, his "precious", and, as recounted in The Hobbit, Bilbo Baggins found it. Meanwhile, Sauron re-assumed physical form and took back his old realm of Mordor. Gollum set out in search of the Ring, but was captured by Sauron, who learnt from him that "Baggins" in the Shire had taken it. Gollum was set loose, and Sauron, who needed the Ring to regain his full power, sent forth his powerful servants, the Nazgûl, to seize it.
The Fellowship of the Ring
The story begins in the Shire, where the Hobbit Frodo Baggins inherits the Ring from Bilbo Baggins, his cousin and guardian. Neither is aware of its origin and nature, but Gandalf the Grey, a wizard and old friend of Bilbo, suspects the Ring's identity. When he becomes certain, he strongly advises Frodo to take it away from the Shire. Frodo leaves, accompanied by his gardener and friend, Samwise ("Sam") Gamgee, and two cousins, Meriadoc ("Merry") Brandybuck and Peregrin ("Pippin") Took. They nearly encounter the Nazgûl while still in the Shire, but shake off pursuit by cutting through the Old Forest, where they are aided by the enigmatic Tom Bombadil, who alone is unaffected by the Ring's corrupting influence. After leaving the forest, they stop in the town of Bree where they meet Strider, who is later revealed to be Aragorn, Isildur's heir. He persuades them to take him on as guide and protector. They flee from Bree after narrowly escaping another assault, but the Nazgûl follow and attack them on the hill of Weathertop, wounding Frodo with a Morgul blade. Aragorn leads the hobbits toward the Elven refuge of Rivendell, while Frodo gradually succumbs to the wound. The Ringwraiths nearly overtake Frodo at the Ford of Bruinen, but flood waters summoned by Elrond, master of Rivendell, rise up and overwhelm them.
Frodo recovers in Rivendell under the care of Elrond. The Council of Elrond reveals much significant history about Sauron and the Ring, as well as the news that Sauron has corrupted Gandalf's fellow wizard, Saruman. The Council decides that the Ring must be destroyed, but that can only be done by returning it to the flames of Mount Doom in Mordor, where it was forged. Frodo volunteers to take on this daunting task, and a "Fellowship of the Ring" is formed to aid him: Sam, Merry, Pippin, Aragorn, Gandalf, Gimli the Dwarf, Legolas the Elf, and the Man Boromir, son of the Ruling Steward Denethor of the realm of Gondor.
After a failed attempt to cross the Misty Mountains via the Redhorn Pass across the flank of Caradhras, the company are forced to try a more perilous path through the Mines of Moria, where they are attacked by the Watcher in the Water before the gate. Inside, they discover the fate of Balin and his colony of Dwarves. After repulsing an attack, they are pursued by orcs and an ancient and powerful demonic creature called a Balrog. Gandalf confronts the Balrog, but in their struggle, both fall into a deep chasm. The others escape and take refuge in the Elven forest of Lothlórien, where they are counselled by Galadriel and Celeborn.
With boats and gifts from Galadriel, the company travel down the River Anduin to the hill of Amon Hen. Boromir succumbs to the lure of the Ring and attempts to take it from Frodo. Frodo escapes and determines to continue the quest alone, though Sam guesses his intent and comes along.
The Two Towers
Orcs sent by Saruman and Sauron kill Boromir and kidnap Merry and Pippin. After agonizing over which pair of hobbits to follow, Aragorn, Gimli and Legolas pursue the orcs bearing Merry and Pippin to Saruman. In the kingdom of Rohan, the orcs are slain by a company of the Rohirrim. Merry and Pippin escape into Fangorn Forest, where they are befriended by Treebeard, the oldest of the tree-like Ents. Aragorn, Gimli and Legolas track the hobbits to Fangorn, and encounter Gandalf, resurrected as the significantly more powerful "Gandalf the White" after his mutually fatal duel with the Balrog. Gandalf assures them that Merry and Pippin are safe. They then ride to Edoras, the capital of Rohan, where they free Théoden, King of Rohan, from the influence of Saruman's henchman Gríma Wormtongue. Théoden musters his fighting strength and rides to the ancient fortress of Helm's Deep, but en route Gandalf leaves to seek help from Treebeard.
Meanwhile, the Ents, roused from their customarily peaceful ways by Merry and Pippin, attack Isengard, Saruman's stronghold, and trap the wizard in the tower of Orthanc. Gandalf convinces Treebeard to send an army of Huorns to Théoden's aid. Gandalf and Rohirrim reinforcements arrive at Helm's Deep just in time to defeat and scatter Saruman's army. The Huorns dispose of the fleeing orcs. Gandalf then parleys with Saruman at Orthanc. When Saruman rejects his offer of redemption, Gandalf strips him of his rank and most of his powers. Pippin looks into a palantír, a seeing-stone that Saruman had used to communicate with Sauron and through which he was enslaved. Gandalf rides for Minas Tirith, chief city of Gondor, taking Pippin with him.
Frodo and Sam capture Gollum, who had been following them from Moria, and force him to guide them to Mordor. Finding Mordor's Black Gate too well guarded to attempt, they travel instead to a secret passage Gollum knows. Torn between his loyalty to Frodo and his desire for the Ring, Gollum eventually betrays Frodo by leading him to the great spider Shelob in the tunnels of Cirith Ungol. Frodo is felled by Shelob's sting, but Sam fights her off. Sam takes the Ring and leaves Frodo, believing him to be dead. When orcs find Frodo, Sam overhears them say that Frodo is only unconscious, and chases after them.
The Return of the King
Sauron unleashes a heavy assault upon Gondor. Gandalf arrives at Minas Tirith to alert Denethor of the impending attack. The city is besieged, and Denethor, deceived by Sauron, gives up hope and commits suicide, nearly taking his remaining son Faramir with him. Aragorn feels he has no choice but to take the Paths of the Dead in order to reach Gondor in time, accompanied by Legolas, Gimli and the Dúnedain Rangers from the North. There Aragorn raises an undead army of oath-breakers bound by an ancient curse that said they could not rest until they had fulfilled their vow to the king of Gondor. The ghostly army helps them to defeat the Corsairs of Umbar who are invading southern Gondor. Commandeering the ships of the Corsairs, Aragorn leads reinforcements up the Anduin to relieve the siege of Minas Tirith, and the forces of Gondor and Rohan defeat Sauron's army in the Battle of the Pelennor Fields.
Meanwhile, Sam rescues Frodo from the tower of Cirith Ungol, and they set out across Mordor. In order to distract Sauron from his true danger, Aragorn leads the armies of Gondor and Rohan in a march on the Black Gate of Mordor. His vastly outnumbered troops fight desperately against Sauron's forces. Reaching the edge of the Cracks of Doom, Frodo is unable to resist the Ring any longer, and suddenly and fiercely claims it for himself. But Gollum suddenly reappears, struggles with Frodo and bites off his finger, Ring and all. Celebrating wildly, Gollum accidentally falls into the fire, taking the Ring with him; and so Frodo's mission is completed. With the destruction of the One Ring, Sauron is permanently shorn of his power, the Nazgûl perish, and his armies are thrown into such disarray that Aragorn's forces emerge victorious.
With the end of the War of the Ring, Aragorn is crowned Elessar, King of Arnor and Gondor, and marries his long-time love, Arwen, daughter of Elrond. Saruman escapes from Isengard and, seeking to carve out a new kingdom, enslaves the Shire. The four hobbits, upon returning home, raise a rebellion and overthrow him. Gríma turns on Saruman and kills him in front of Frodo's house, and is slain in turn by hobbit archers. The War of the Ring thus comes to its true end on Frodo's very doorstep.

Merry and Pippin are acclaimed heroes, while Sam marries Rosie Cotton and uses his gifts from Galadriel to help heal the Shire. Frodo, however, remains wounded in body and spirit after having borne the oppressive weight of the One Ring so long.
Several years later, accompanied by Bilbo and Gandalf, he sails from the Grey Havens west over the Sea to the Undying Lands to find peace. After Rosie's death, Sam gives his daughter the Red Book of Westmarch, containing the account of Bilbo's adventures and the War of the Ring as witnessed by the hobbits. Sam is then said to have crossed west over the Sea himself, the last of the Ring-bearers.

Hobbits, were the smallest of peoples of Middle Earth and if ones attention were not deliberately drawn toward them, they might very simply go unnoticed. Yet in this tale of good and evil, fear and fortitude, cowardliness and courage, doom and hope, it is the tiniest and most insignificant that carry the hope of all men, elves, dwarves, kings and dominions. Frodo and Sam, ring-bearer and servant, companion and friend, carry the hope of all Middle Earth.
Gandalf  once said of hobbits: “My dear Frodo. Hobbits really are amazing creatures. You can learn all there is to know about their ways in a month, and yet after a hundred years they can still surprise you.” 
Galadriel , Lady of the Wood, said: “Even the smallest person can change the course of the future.” And, “But then something happened that the Ring did not intend. It was picked up by the most unlikely creature imaginable. A Hobbit, Bilbo Baggins, of the Shire. For the time will soon come when Hobbits will shape the fortunes of all.”
And in the chronicled record of their quest Tolkien writes: “One tiny Hobbit against all the evil the world could muster. A sane being would have given up, but Samwise burned with a magnificent madness, a glowing obsession to surmount every obstacle, to find Frodo, destroy the Ring, and cleanse Middle Earth of its festering malignancy. He knew he would try again. Fail, perhaps. And try once more. A thousand, thousand times if need be, but he would not give up the quest.” 
And though some may have had reason to doubt the determination of Hobbits, no other creature in Middle Earth could have resisted the power of the Ring and completed the task, let alone our two unlikely companions. And, when Frodo was prepared to make the journey alone, sparing the party of the doom that was to come, Samwise persisted.
Frodo: “Go back, Sam! I’m going to Mordor alone.”
Sam: “Of course you are, and I’m coming with you!” 
The Lord of the Rings: The Two Towers
Book two of the saga finds Frodo and Samwise up against obstacles and delays. At one point Frodo seems to have lost hope.
 
Frodo: I can't do this, Sam. 
Sam: “I know. It's all wrong. By rights we shouldn't even be here. But we are. It's like in the great stories, Mr. Frodo. The ones that really mattered. Full of darkness and danger, they were. And sometimes you didn't want to know the end. Because how could the end be happy? How could the world go back to the way it was when so much bad had happened? But in the end, it's only a passing thing, this shadow. Even darkness must pass. A new day will come. And when the sun shines it will shine out the clearer. Those were the stories that stayed with you. That meant something, even if you were too small to understand why. But I think, Mr. Frodo, I do understand. I know now. Folk in those stories had lots of chances of turning back, only they didn't. They kept going. Because they were holding on to something.”
Frodo: “What are we holding onto, Sam?”
Sam: “That there's some good in this world, Mr. Frodo... and it's worth fighting for.”
Thus, it is Samwise, the servant, who hangs onto hope. And in The Return of the King (Book 3), it is Samwise, whose sheer determination to not fail, assures their quest for hope will not end without a struggle. As Frodo cannot physically continue on their journey to the Mountain of Doom, Samwise says: “Come, Mr. Frodo!’ he cried. “I can’t carry it for you, but I can carry you.”
Hobbits and Other Little Things
"We all agree that your theory is crazy, but is it crazy enough?" 
-Niels Bohr
It was crazy enough to send Hobbits on the dangerous and impossible journey to the Mountain of Doom, deep in Mordor, with the only hope for middle earth. It was even crazier to hypothesize the atom!
The Democritus Atom
The idea of atoms has been around since the fifth century BC.  A jolly philosopher named Demokritos  opposed the popular idea of the four elements (fire, earth, water, and air), and argued that everything is made up from elements that cannot be divided any further.  He called these elements a-thomos, which means indivisible.  It took humanity two and a half millennia to develop the technology needed to pierce through to the level of those smallest indivisible things—in the meantime early scientist hoped it was true.  When experiments verified the existence of those structures that we now call atoms, everybody thought they had found Demokritos’ indivisibles.  That is why they called them atoms.  (Like Columbus naming the American Natives ‘Indians’.  Same thing) 
Backs were patted, applause sounded, medals of valor were passed around by shaking hands.  But as in any theory, there was something fishy about the atom, something that could not be explained—kind of like quantum hope.  In 1911 a man named Ernest Rutherford  (pictured here [38]) was shooting so-called alpha radiation at a thin sheet of gold (while hollering Onward Christian Soldiers full blast through the lab).  What he did not know and what nobody knew was that the alpha particles that make up alpha radiation were in fact the bare nuclei of helium atoms; and he was shooting them at gold atoms. 
 	Most of the alpha particles zipped clean through the gold but some were diverted and some even bounced straight back.  By the way the alpha particles behaved, Rutherford concluded that 99% of an atoms mass was concentrated at the core.  
Atoms were not indivisible at all!  They had some kind of inner structure.  In a manner, their hope failed. Bummer!
The Bohr Atom
Sounds of dismay ripped through the realm, glory was rescinded, and champagne poured back in the bottle.  However, a fine young man named Niels Bohr  (below, right [38]) saved the day by coming up with an atom-model that has been known as the Bohr Atom (below, left) ever since.
                       
Niels was not an exceptionally smart man, he just had a vivid imagination, and, according to Einstein, that is often more important than raw processor speed.  Niels figured out that what we call an atom is in fact a tiny nucleus surrounded by a cloud of electrons.  These electrons, Niels demanded and perhaps hoped, were situated in spheres around the nucleus and they could jump from one sphere to a larger one by absorbing one quantum of energy (which is exactly one photon because besides lighting everything up and keeping everything together, photons also make everything move).
That was in 1913, and although Bohr received the Nobel Prize for physics in 1922 for his atom model—that still stands today—it failed to explain why there were so many different elements in much the same what that quantum hope is not fully explained.  Elements in the periodic table are the way they are because electrons do not just simply huddle around the nucleus in the tightest ring. Instead, they refuse electrons to join when a ring is full.  Hence, some electrons are kept in outer rings and elements maintain their uniqueness .  How do atoms do that? 
Pauli's Exclusion Principle
The answer came in 1926 by a young genius named Wolfgang Pauli  (picture here [38]) who postulated the Exclusion Principle.  It roughly states that no fermion (such as electrons) can share a spot with another one (and remember a ‘spot’ for a quantum particle is a blur of most likely spots).  This is in contrast to bosons that can be piled upon the same fermion until it is blue in the face.  Pauli discovered that electrons have four characteristics, some of which can have two values (one or zero; yea or nay, etc.), leaving the electron eight separate states to exist in.  The Exclusion Principle states that two electrons that have identical values for those four characteristics cannot occupy the same sphere around the nucleus.  Hence, only eight electrons per sphere are allowed and the elements were explained.
 

 

The black bar is one ångström 
(10−10 m or 100 pm).	A depiction of the atomic structure of the helium atom.  The darkness of the electron cloud corresponds to the line-of-sight integral over the probability function of the 1s atomic orbital of the electron.  The magnified nucleus is schematic, showing protons (top and bottom) and neutrons (left and right).  In reality, the nucleus (and the wave function of each of the nucleons) is also spherically symmetric and 1s.  Also, the four particles, each with a different quantum number, like the electrons in the helium atom, are all most likely to be found in the same space, at the exact center of the nucleus. [37]


The Creator deemed it fitting to not only give all quantum particles sovereignty in matters of their progression, He also gave electrons an inescapable unique perspective on the nucleus they were orbiting.  The so-called limitation of a quantum’s sovereignty does not actually limit the particle; it forces it into unicity—meaning uniqueness.
Principle (4):
The Exclusion Principle: Two electrons that have identical values cannot occupy the same position relative to the nucleus.
Like the Exclusion Principle for electrons, there was an exclusion principle in Middle Earth: You can’t have your cake and eat it too! Restated, “You can’t have your Ring and wear it too.”
The Ring seemed to be made simply of gold, but it was impervious to damage. It could be destroyed only by throwing it into the pit of the volcanic Mount Doom where it was originally forged. Unlike other rings, the One Ring was not susceptible to dragon fire. [4] Like some lesser rings forged by the Elves as "essays in the craft"—but unlike the other Rings of Power—the One Ring bore no gem. Its identity could be determined by a little-known but simple test: when placed in a fire, it displayed a fiery Tengwar inscription in the Black Speech of Mordor, with two lines from a rhyme of lore describing the Rings:
Three Rings for the Elven-kings under the sky,
Seven for the Dwarf-lords in their halls of stone,
Nine for Mortal Men doomed to die,
One for the Dark Lord on his dark throne
In the Land of Mordor where the Shadows lie.
One Ring to rule them all, One Ring to find them,
One Ring to bring them all and in the darkness bind them
In the Land of Mordor where the Shadows lie.
The lines inscribed on the Ring (in boldface above) were pronounced by Sauron when he forged the Ring. The Elven smiths heard him chanting them, and thereupon became aware of his purpose and took off their own Rings to foil his plan.
A person wearing the Ring would enter a shadowy world revealing the physical world from a different aspect, and from which physical objects were harder to see. The wearer was mostly invisible to ordinary beings, like Men, but highly visible to the Nazgûl. The Ring dimmed the wearer's sight, while at the same time sharpening the other senses.
The Ring slowly but inevitably corrupted its bearer, regardless of the bearer’s initial intent. For this reason the Wise, including Gandalf, Elrond, and Galadriel, refused to wield it themselves, but determined instead that it should be destroyed. The corrupting power of the ring was apparently stronger on individuals more inclined to evil and selfishness: it took almost immediate hold of the greedy Sméagol as soon as he saw it, and corrupted Boromir after a few months of near proximity, while its effects were only starting to be seen in the noble Bilbo after 60 years of his owning it.
The Ring had the ability to change size. As well as adapting to fingers of varying size, from Sauron’s to Frodo’s, it sometimes suddenly expanded to escape its wearer.
The only hope for Middle Earth was to destroy the One Ring…
Three Similar Stories of Hope 
Tolkien maintained that in spite of its religious undertones, The Lord of the Rings was not a Christian allegory. Yet it is easy to see that there are similarities between the Story of Elves, Dwarves, Wizards and even Hobbits—and the hope they carried with them—and the story of a band of 12 men and their Teacher and the hope that He bore.
Neither epic of hope is about a feeling or emotion, a state of mind or a theory. Instead, they both insists on a hope that is both tangible and measureable, though perhaps just a glimmer. A glimmer of hope, a tiny quantum of hope, is all that is required to sustain, to continue our journey of faith, to persevere as we wait for it to unfold, and to reveal itself in its entirety. 
“For in this hope we were saved. Now hope that is seen is not hope. For who hopes for what he sees? But if we hope for what we do not see, with perseverance we wait eagerly for it.” 
– Romans 8:24-25
From Demokritos to Rutherford to Bohr, scientist could merely hope that their hypothesized atom existed, until finally we were able to prove its existence and properties. As all elements are built upon the tiniest of particles, the atomic structure, so our faith—our belief in Salvation itself—is built upon the foundation of quantum hope, a hope that is not seen, but is measureable. And so, similarities exist between the story of a Ring, the story of Hope in the Savior, and the story of the Atom.
Chapter 6 Summary
Middle earth placed their hope in the smallest of peoples: Hobbits.
Middle earth believed in the hope entrusted to Frodo and Samwise even though they could not see them or know of their progress.
The Lords of the Rings has Christion undertones and may be interpreted as a Christian allegory.
Atoms consist of a tiny nucleus surrounded by electrons that are kept together by means of the electromagnetic force. 
The atomic orbital model or Bohr Atom is the currently accepted model of the placement of electrons in an atom.
All electrons have a unique perspective on the nucleus they are orbiting.
The story of Christion hope (Jesus and his disciples and ministry), the story of Middle Earth hope, and the story of the atomic particles are very similar

 
Rational Thought and Hope
“People look to the order of numbers when the world falls apart.” 
—John Nash
Irrational Numbers
Pi is that funny Greek letter, π, that you may have seen a lot of in trigonometry. You may be familiar with the formula πr^2, even though we know pies are round! What you may not know is that π is irrational, as a number. In mathematics, an irrational number is any real number that cannot be expressed as a ratio of integers. Irrational numbers cannot be represented as terminating or repeating decimals. So π, e and √2 are irrational numbers. As a consequence of Cantor's proof that the real numbers are uncountable and the rationals countable, it follows that almost all real numbers are irrational. When the ratio of lengths of two line segments is irrational, the line segments are also described as being incommensurable, meaning they share no measure in common.
The first proof of the existence of irrational numbers is usually attributed to a Pythagorean (possibly Hippasus of Metapontum) [45], who probably discovered them while identifying sides of the pentagram. The then-current Pythagorean method would have claimed that there must be some sufficiently small, indivisible unit that could fit evenly into one of these lengths as well as the other. However, Hippasus, in the 5th century BC, was able to deduce that there was in fact no common unit of measure, and that the assertion of such an existence was in fact a contradiction. He did this by demonstrating that if the hypotenuse of an isosceles right triangle was indeed commensurable with a leg, then that unit of measure must be both odd and even, which is impossible.
Greek mathematicians termed this ratio of incommensurable magnitudes alogos, or inexpressible. The Greek alogos is in fact the antonym of logos. We find the Greek work logos in John, Chapter 1, where John writes:
“In the beginning was the logos, and the logos was with God, and the logos was God.”
The logos is Gods expressible or spoken Word. The logos is Christ (pre-incarnate and incarnate). It was the logos that spoke creation into existence, who uttered, “Let there be photos.” So, in a sense we have alogos associated with irrationals, leaving the rationals to be associated with logos.
Decimal expansions
The decimal expansion of an irrational number never repeats or terminates, unlike a rational number. Similarly for binary, octal or hexadecimal expansions, and in general for expansions in every positional notation with natural bases.
To show this, suppose we divide integers n by m (where m is nonzero). When long division is applied to the division of n by m, only m remainders are possible. If 0 appears as a remainder, the decimal expansion terminates. If 0 never occurs, then the algorithm can run at most m − 1 steps without using any remainder more than once. After that, a remainder must recur, and then the decimal expansion repeats.
Conversely, suppose we are faced with a repeating decimal, we can prove that it is a fraction of two integers. For example, consider:
A=0.7 162 162 162 ⋯ 
Here the repetend is 162 and the length of the repetend is 3. First, we multiply by an appropriate power of 10 to move the decimal point to the right so that it is just in front of a repetend. In this example we would multiply by 10 to obtain:
10A=7.162 162 162 ⋯
Now we multiply this equation by 〖10〗^r where r is the length of the repetend. This has the effect of moving the decimal point to be in front of the "next" repetend. In our example, multiply by 103:
10,000A=7 162.162 162 ⋯
The result of the two multiplications gives two different expressions with exactly the same "decimal portion", that is, the tail end of 10,000A matches the tail end of 10A exactly. Here, both 10,000A and 10A have .162162162 ... at the end.
Therefore, when we subtract the 10A equation from the 10,000A equation, the tail end of 10A cancels out the tail end of 10,000A leaving us with:
9990A = 7155.
Then
A=7155/9990=(135×53)/(135×74)=53/74
(135 is the greatest common divisor of 7155 and 9990). 53/74 is a quotient of integers and therefore a rational number.


At any rate, Hippasus was not lauded for his efforts: according to one legend, he made his discovery while out at sea, and was subsequently thrown overboard by his fellow Pythagoreans “…for having produced an element in the universe which denied the…doctrine that all phenomena in the universe can be reduced to whole numbers and their ratios.” [46] Another legend states that Hippasus was merely exiled for this revelation. Whatever the consequence to Hippasus himself, his discovery posed a very serious problem to Pythagorean mathematics, since it shattered the assumption that number and geometry were inseparable–a foundation of their theory. Needless to say, the discovery of irrational number shook the world (of mathematics).
Irrationality
Irrationality is cognition, thinking, talking or acting without inclusion of rationality. It is more specifically described as an action or opinion given through inadequate use of reason, emotional distress, or cognitive deficiency.
In Irrationality: The Enemy Within, Stuart Sutherland examines why doctors, army generals, high-ranking government officials and other people in positions of power make bad decisions that cause harm to others; why punishments are so ineffective; and why interviewing is such an unsatisfactory method of selection. 
Irrationality is a challenging and thought-provoking book that draws on statistical concepts, probability theory and a mass of intriguing research to expose the failings of human reasoning, judgment and intuition. Sutherland explores the inconsistencies of human behavior, and discovers why even the experts find it so hard to make rational and unbiased decisions. 
Below, I will elaborate on of few cognitive concepts that demonstrate the inability to arrive at belief and hope without rational thought.
The Halo Effect
The halo effect is a cognitive bias in which an observer's overall impression of a person, company, brand, or product influences the observer's feelings and thoughts about that entity's character or properties. It was named by psychologist Edward Thorndike in reference to a person being perceived as having a halo. Subsequent researchers have studied it in relation to attractiveness and its bearing on the judicial and educational systems. The halo effect is a specific type of confirmation bias, wherein positive feelings in one area cause ambiguous or neutral traits to be viewed positively. Edward Thorndike originally coined the term referring only to people [47]; however, its use has been greatly expanded especially in the area of brand marketing. The devil effect, also known as the reverse halo effect, is when people allow an undesirable trait to influence their evaluation of other traits.
Groupthink
Groupthink is a psychological phenomenon that occurs within a group of people, in which the desire for harmony or conformity in the group results in an irrational or dysfunctional decision-making outcome [48]. Group members try to minimize conflict and reach a consensus decision without critical evaluation of alternative viewpoints, by actively suppressing dissenting viewpoints, and by isolating themselves from outside influences.
Irving Janis pioneered the initial research on the groupthink theory. He does not cite Whyte, but coined the term by analogy with “doublethink” and similar terms that were part of the newspeak vocabulary in the novel Nineteen Eighty-Four by George Orwell. He initially defined groupthink as follows:
I use the term groupthink as a quick and easy way to refer to the mode of thinking that persons engage in when concurrence-seeking becomes so dominant in a cohesive ingroup that it tends to override realistic appraisal of alternative courses of action. Groupthink is a term of the same order as the words in the newspeak vocabulary George Orwell used in his dismaying world of 1984. In that context, groupthink takes on an invidious connotation. Exactly such a connotation is intended, since the term refers to a deterioration in mental efficiency, reality testing and moral judgments as a result of group pressures. [49]
Loyalty to the group requires individuals to avoid raising controversial issues or alternative solutions, and there is loss of individual creativity, uniqueness and independent thinking. The dysfunctional group dynamics of the ingroup produces an “illusion of invulnerability” (an inflated certainty that the right decision has been made). Thus the ingroup significantly overrates its own abilities in decision-making, and significantly underrates the abilities of its opponents (the outgroup). Furthermore groupthink can produce dehumanizing actions against the outgroup [49].
Janis set the foundation for the study of groupthink starting with his research in the American Soldier Project where he studied the effect of extreme stress on group cohesiveness. After this study he remained interested in the ways in which people make decisions under external threats. This interest led Janis to study a number of “disasters” in American foreign policy, such as failure to anticipate the Japanese attack on Pearl Harbor (1941); the Bay of Pigs Invasion fiasco (1961); and the prosecution of the Vietnam War (1964–67) by President Lyndon Johnson. He concluded that in each of these cases, the decisions occurred largely because of groupthink, which prevented contradictory views from being expressed and subsequently evaluated [50]. 
Cognitive dissonance: the engine that drives self-justification
The need to justify our actions and decisions, especially the ones inconsistent with our beliefs, comes from the unpleasant feeling called cognitive dissonance [51]. Cognitive dissonance is a state of tension that occurs whenever a person holds two inconsistent cognitions. For example, “smoking will shorten the life which I wish to live for as long as possible” and yet “I smoke three packs a day”.
Dissonance is bothersome in any circumstance but it is especially painful when an important element of self-concept is threatened. For instance, if the smoker considered himself a healthy person, this would cause a greater deal of dissonance than if he considered himself an unhealthy person because the dissonant action is in direct conflict with an image of himself. In this case, people who tried to stop smoking but failed start to think that smoking is not harmful as much as they thought [52].
Self-justification strategies
There are two self-justification strategies: internal self-justification (IS) and external self-justification (ES) [53].
Internal self-justification refers to a change in the way people perceive their actions. It may be an attitude change, trivialization of the negative consequences or denial of the negative consequences. Internal self-justification helps make the negative outcomes more tolerable and is usually elicited by hedonistic dissonance. For example, the smoker may tell himself that smoking is not really that bad for his health.
External self-justification refers to the use of external excuses to justify one's actions. The excuses can be a displacement of personal responsibility, lack of self-control or social pressures. External self-justification aims to diminish one's responsibility for a behavior and is usually elicited by moral dissonance. For example, the smoker might say that he only smokes socially and because other people expect him to.
Self-justification and moral choices
Self-justification often comes into play when discussing why individuals make “immoral” decisions. To keep viewing themselves in a positive light, individuals may rationalize unethical or corrupt decision-making using the aforementioned self-justification strategies.
In a 1958 study on cheating, Mills administered a test to a sixth grade class that was impossible to pass without cheating. Before the test, he measured each student’s attitudes toward cheating. He then gave the 6th graders the test without supervision but with a hidden camera in the classroom. Half of the class cheated and half didn’t. Mills then measured each student’s attitude towards cheating after the test. He found that the students who did cheat developed a more lenient attitude towards cheating while the students who did not cheat developed stronger attitudes against cheating [54].
In Mills’ study, self-justification occurred. After each student decided whether or not to cheat, they justified this decision to make themselves feel good. In order to reduce their cognitive dissonance, the students that did cheat altered their thoughts on cheating: i.e., “cheating isn’t that bad” or “cheating was required in order to achieve the prize” to justify their actions. On the other hand, students that did not cheat may have justified a lack of success on the test to: “I have too good of morals to cheat” or “Cheating is never right.” In both instances, the student is trying to justify their actions and retain their self-concept.
This experiment shows potential dangers of self-justification. It seems that people who partake in unethical behavior may become slightly more accepting and comfortable with their actions [55].
Decision making: conflict escalation
One major claim of social psychology is that we experience cognitive dissonance every time we make a decision; in an attempt to alleviate this, we then submit to a largely unconscious reduction of dissonance by creating new motives of our decision making that more positively reflect on our self-concept. This process of reducing cognitive dissonance regarding decision-making relates back to the problem of individual becoming stagnant in a course of action. Furthermore, once an individual makes a decision dissonance has begun. In order to alleviate this dissonance, he or she rationalizes their actions either by changing them, or in this case continuing on in their course of action, perpetuating their qualifying beliefs. In this case, the question concerns the source of the breakdown of rationale that causes the continuation of such disadvantageous behavior [56].
Confirmation Bias 
Confirmation bias, also called myside bias, is the tendency to search for, interpret, or recall information in a way that confirms one's beliefs or hypotheses [57]. It is a type of cognitive bias and a systematic error of inductive reasoning. People display this bias when they gather or remember information selectively, or when they interpret it in a biased way. The effect is stronger for emotionally charged issues and for deeply entrenched beliefs. People also tend to interpret ambiguous evidence as supporting their existing position. Biased search, interpretation and memory have been invoked to explain attitude polarization (when a disagreement becomes more extreme even though the different parties are exposed to the same evidence), belief perseverance (when beliefs persist after the evidence for them is shown to be false), the irrational primacy effect (a greater reliance on information encountered early in a series) and illusory correlation (when people falsely perceive an association between two events or situations).
A series of experiments in the 1960s suggested that people are biased toward confirming their existing beliefs. Later work re-interpreted these results as a tendency to test ideas in a one-sided way, focusing on one possibility and ignoring alternatives. In certain situations, this tendency can bias people’s conclusions. Explanations for the observed biases include wishful thinking and the limited human capacity to process information. Another explanation is that people show confirmation bias because they are weighing up the costs of being wrong, rather than investigating in a neutral, scientific way.
Confirmation biases contribute to overconfidence in personal beliefs and can maintain or strengthen beliefs in the face of contrary evidence (persistence of belief). Poor decisions due to these biases have been found in political and organizational contexts [58] [59].
Reasons for persistence of belief: 
1. “People consistently avoid exposing themselves to evidence that might disprove their beliefs.”
2. “On receiving evidence against their beliefs, they often refuse to believe it.”
3. “The existence of a belief distorts people's interpretation of new evidence in such a way as to make it consistent with the belief.”
4. “People selectively remember items that are in line with their beliefs.”
5. Belief is shaped by “the desire to protect one's self-esteem.”
6. If the explanation the subject comes up with for the belief is satisfying, then the belief itself perseveres.
Rational Thought, Belief and Hope
A Troubled Mind
From the heights of notoriety to the depths of depravity, John Forbes Nash, Jr. experienced it all. A mathematical genius, he made an astonishing discovery early in his career and stood on the brink of international acclaim. But the handsome and arrogant Nash soon found himself on a painful and harrowing mental journey into the depths of schizophrenia, of extensive and evasive psychotherapy, and at last of self-discovery. After many years of struggle, he eventually triumphed over his tragedy, and finally—late in life—received the Nobel Prize.
 
At Princeton University, John Nash struggled to make a worthwhile contribution to serve as his legacy to the world of mathematics. He finally made a revolutionary breakthrough that would eventually earn him the Nobel Prize. After graduate school he turned to teaching, becoming romantically involved with his student Alicia. Nash began working for the RAND Corporation, but after being arrested in a homosexual drag net, he lost his security clearance. Returning to teaching, he resigned in 1959 during Alicia pregnancy and began his journey into darkness. In spite of the frequent involuntary admittance to psychiatric wards, rationality was Nash’s only hope of returning to reality and the world of mathematics.
John Forbes Nash, Jr. 
John Nash (born June 13, 1928) is an American mathematician whose works in game theory, differential geometry, and partial differential equations have provided insight into the factors that govern chance and events inside complex systems in daily life.
His theories are used in economics, computing, evolutionary biology, artificial intelligence, accounting, politics and military theory. Serving as a Senior Research Mathematician at Princeton University during the latter part of his life, he shared the 1994 Nobel Memorial Prize in Economic Sciences with game theorists Reinhard Selten and John Harsanyi. In 2015, he was awarded the Abel Prize (along with Louis Nirenberg) for his work on nonlinear partial differential equations.
Nash is the subject of the 2001 Ron Howard-directed film A Beautiful Mind, with Russell Crowe portraying Nash. The film, loosely based on the biography of the same name, focuses on Nash's mathematical genius and his schizophrenia.


A Beautiful Mind
Rational thought had served the young Nash well. His observance of rational behavior lead to his original idea in Game Theory and the so-called Nash Equilibrium.  In the movie, A Beautiful Mind, Nash (played by Russell Crowe) is as rational as they come.  
Alicia: How big is the universe? 
Nash: Infinite. 
Alicia: How do you know? 
Nash: I know because all the data indicates it's infinite. 
Alicia: But it hasn't been proven yet. 
Nash: No. 
Alicia: You haven't seen it. 
Nash: No. 
Alicia: How do you know for sure? 
Nash: I don't, I just believe it. 
Alicia: It's the same with love I guess. 
Nash just believed that the universe is infinite. What he did not know is that the universe is bounded by the infinite, God. Nevertheless, he took something as fact that he merely believed, based on data that he had assessed, though the data was not complete or not fully visible.
For in this hope we were saved. Now hope that is seen is not hope. For who hopes for what he sees? But if we hope for what we do not see, with perseverance we wait eagerly for it. (Romans 8:24-25)
Nash’s rational thought included “belief” based on inconclusive or incomplete evidence. That is, evidence that could not be seen. During his years of mental despair, Nash became irrational (like the rest of us). However, he held onto the hope that rational thought would revisit his psyche. He resisted treatment and and medication, believing it was destroy any trace of rational thought that might be left in him. Nash knew he was mentally ill and he did not need a psychiatrist to convince him of that. Certainly he needed help, but he was convinced that the help would come from within.
Eventually, Nash’s recovery did come from within, but is was aided by hope—a hope to return to reason and a hope of reconciliation with Alicia.  In his Nobel laureate speech, Nash revealed the rational hope that led him from utter despair to Stockholm in 1994.
“What truly is logic? Who decides reason? My quest has taken me to the physical, the metaphysical, the delusional, and back. I have made the most important discovery of my career - the most important discovery of my life. It is only in the mysterious equations of love that any logic or reasons can be found. I am only here tonight because of you [looking at and speaking to Alicia]. You are the only reason I am. You are all my reasons. Thank you.”
We really do not know whether Nash was a believer on any level. But he did believe in the supernatural.
“Because the ideas I had about supernatural beings came to me the same way that my mathematical ideas did. So I took them seriously.” 
In A Beautiful Mind (the book), Nash and Alicia have the following conversation:
Nash: You once said that God must be a painter because he gave us so many colors. 
Alicia: I didn't think you were listening... 
Nash: I was listening. 
It would seem that in his rational mind, Nash did not deny the existence of God, or at least a supernatural power in the universe, which is supported by his autobiography.
Nash would continued to struggle with the the battle between rational and irrational thought.
[To Thomas King] “I still see things that are not here. I just choose not to acknowledge them. Like a diet of the mind, I just choose not to indulge certain appetites; like my appetite for patterns; perhaps my appetite to imagine and to dream.” 
However, of all the people in the world and though certifiably suffering from schizophrenia, Nash may have been more sane than most of us, for he completely understood the struggle of his mind, while most of us are oblivious to our own. He understood the power of the mind to win the battle between irrational and rational thought, perhaps more than anyone. But he also understood matters of the heart.
“The only thing greater than the power of the mind is the courage of the heart” 
― John Nash
A Rational Mind
Nash returned to rational thought and even though the battle still raged, he allowed rational thought to dominate. In his Nobel autobiography, Nash wrote:
“Gradually I began to intellectually reject some of the delusionally influenced lines of thinking which had been characteristic of my orientation. This began, most recognizably, with the rejection of politically-oriented thinking as essentially a hopeless waste of intellectual effort.”
“And it did happen that when I had been long enough hospitalized that I would finally renounce my delusional hypotheses and revert to thinking of myself as a human of more conventional circumstances and return to mathematical research. In these interludes of, as it were, enforced rationality, I did succeed in doing some respectable mathematical research. Thus there came about the research for “Le Probleme de Cauchy pour les E’quations Differentielles d’un Fluide Generale”; the idea that Prof. Hironaka called “the Nash blowing-up transformation”; and those of “Arc Structure of Singularities” and “Analyticity of Solutions of Implicit Function Problems with Analytic Data”.”
“So at the present time I seem to be thinking rationally again in the style that is characteristic of scientists. However this is not entirely a matter of joy as if someone returned from physical disability to good physical health. One aspect of this is that rationality of thought imposes a limit on a person’s concept of his relation to the cosmos. For example, a non-Zoroastrian could think of Zarathustra as simply a madman who led millions of naive followers to adopt a cult of ritual fire worship. But without his “madness” Zarathustra would necessarily have been only another of the millions or billions of human individuals who have lived and then been forgotten.”
 “Statistically, it would seem improbable that any mathematician or scientist, at the age of 66, would be able through continued research efforts, to add much to his or her previous achievements. However I am still making the effort and it is conceivable that with the gap period of about 25 years of partially deluded thinking providing a sort of vacation my situation may be atypical. Thus I have hopes of being able to achieve something of value through my current studies or with any new ideas that come in the future.” [61]
Who’s to say that madness is not a good thing? I rational thought really a sign of madness and is the world really backwards in its thinking. If most people are irrational and sane, I choose rational and mad. In in my madness, there is room for quantum hope!

Chapter 7 Summary
Irrational numbers occur much more often that rational numbers in the number system.
Most people use an irrational thought process characterized by biases, self-justification, cognitive dissonance, etc.
Irrational thought discounts truth in spite of the physical evidence.
Rational thought supports beliefs that are based on partial evidence.
Quantum hope can only be grasped through rational thought.

 
The Incompleteness Theorem of Kurt Gödel
“For now we see in a mirror dimly, but then face to face. Now I know in part; then I shall know fully, even as I have been fully known. “
—1st Corinthians 13:12 (ESV)
- Children of the Primes -
"One might imagine that it would be possible to list all possible ‘obvious’ steps of reasoning once and for all, so that from then on everything could be reduced to computation—i.e. the mere mechanical manipulation of these obvious steps.  What Gödel’s argument shows is that this is not possible.  There is no way of eliminating the need for new ‘obvious’ understandings.  Thus, mathematical understanding cannot be reduced to blind computation." 
-Roger Penrose
Gödel's shocking discovery
In 1931 a grim and paranoid genius named Kurt Gödel  (pictured right [38])—the ‘Martin Luther’  of mathematics—discovered another reason why mathematics cannot be the language in which the whole Truth may one day be expressed.
Probably as poorly understood and often misapplied as Luther (pictured below [38]), Kurt Gödel made himself odious by mathematically proving that a system founded on axioms can never hope to find proof for the consistency of those initial axioms, and will therefore always be incomplete.  This is called Gödel's Incompleteness Theorem and this theorem caused a Reformation in logic philosophy.  Just as Luther  ‘proved’ that salvation comes through faith and not works, Gödel proved that the whole Truth can only be believed and not proven.  Alan Turing (see box below) later reformulated Gödel’s results.
What a bummer for all those hopeful believers who hoped that one day, somehow, either Math or their philosophy, or their religion would lead them out of the bondage of ignorance.  It was not to be...
Since Gödel, we know that a logical system cannot liberate; but that does not mean that rules are bad.  Rules help create order and understanding.  A society based on rules is far better off than a society not based on rules.  And Math put a man on the moon.  Math gave us the Internet.  Math gave us this completely wild global culture.  Yea, Math may run with the wind they call Mariah  and the free-range antelope, as long as it does not try to address ‘the whole Truth’.  A system of logic cannot cover Truth; Truth cannot be expressed in logic.  The Grand Unification Theory (GUT) will not be written in Math.  This is also the reason why you never hear anyone solemnly swear to tell the Truth, the whole Truth and nothing but the Truth, so help me Mathematics.
Still, Math is beautiful.  Do thy best old Math, despite thy wrong.
A logical system (scientific, philosophical, religious, legal)
Departs from:	And then:	Which leads to:
An axiomatic platform wrought from the present insight of the observer.	starts concluding and forms a body of derivations	Nothing; must remain incomplete.  Hence, a consensus is not possible.  Hence, confusion abounds.

There is, however, nothing wrong with being learned.  Paul was learned.  And so was Jesus.  Solomon was a brilliant poet and philosopher, as well as an economical genius, way ahead of his time; and he wrote, “Trust in the Lord with all your heart, and lean not on your own understanding.” [62]  (Prov. 3:5, NKJV)
We've known for thousands of years, but since Gödel we have a proof written in mankind's most common scientific language, fully in the tradition of Ezra, and making it less and less attractive to believe in anything else than God.
A clear and present example of the fallacy of logic systems is of course the number sequence itself.  From a few simple axioms, an infinite sequence is wrought that will never be watertight and new primes must inveterately be added.
The exact same pattern can be found in math and science.  New ideas and new rules must continuously be added, and after these new rules have run their stretch, holes appear in the continuity of that which is known.  Hence, new rules must be added.
 
ALAN TURING
Alan Mathison Turing, OBE, FRS (23 June 1912 – 7 June 1954), was an English mathematician, logician, cryptanalyst and computer scientist.  He was highly influential in the development of computer science, providing a formalization of the concepts of "algorithm" and "computation" with the Turing machine, which played a significant role in the creation of the modern computer.
In his momentous paper “On Computable Numbers, with an Application to the Entscheidungs problem”, [62] Turing reformulated Kurt Gödel's 1931 results on the limits of proof and computation, replacing Gödel's universal arithmetic-based formal language with what became known as Turing machines, formal and simple devices.  He proved that some such machine would be capable of performing any conceivable mathematical computation if it were representable as an algorithm.  He went on to prove that there was no solution to the Entscheidungs problem by first showing that the halting problem for Turing machines is undecidable: it is not possible to decide, in general, algorithmically whether a given Turing machine will ever halt.  While his proof was published subsequent to Alonzo Church's equivalent proof, in respect to his lambda calculus, Turing was unaware of Church's work at the time.  Turing's approach is considerably more accessible and intuitive.  It was also novel in its notion of a 'Universal (Turing) Machine', the idea that such a machine could perform the tasks of any other machine.  In other words, is provably capable of computing anything that is computable.
The western legal system, ditto.  “To prove this let facts be submitted to a candid world”.  “We hold these Truths to be self-evident.”  However, as the world turned it became clear that even a document as profound as the Constitution could not cover all possible situations.  Hence, the Amendments and the Supreme Court, which must add new explanations and interpretations to fill the holes in the continuity, came into being.

Bottom line: no logical system will ever be finish forming, can never cover everything, and can never represent Truth.
Principle (5)
No logical system will ever be able to present fully the Truth about the Universe.
The most obvious Biblical application of this principle is of course the building of the Tower of Babel, in Genesis 11.  The people that lived on the Plain of Shinar could not reach heaven by stacking brick upon brick.  But the principle shows up all over Scriptures.  In Luke 17:20 for instance where Jesus says, “The Kingdom of God does not come with your careful observation.” [6] (NIV-UK)
Truth 
“Any concepts or words which have been formed in the past through the interplay between the world and ourselves are not really sharply defined with respect to their meaning: that is to say, we do not know exactly how far they will help us in finding our way in the world.  We often know that they can be applied to a wide range of inner or outer experience, but we practically never know precisely the limits of their applicability.  This is true even of the simplest and most general concepts like "existence" and "space and time".  Therefore, it will never be possible by pure reason to arrive at some absolute truth.”
- Werner Heisenberg
This has a very serious implication because it tells us something about the inherent qualities of Truth even before we understand what Truth actually is. 
 	Just as Socrates could not say what worked, only what not worked, can we say that whatever Truth is, no logical system can ever stack its bricks high enough to reach it.
That implies that, provided we assume that Truth could exist, it must present itself fully and singularly from outside the observer’s frame of reference.
In other words, Truth must simply show up and be absolutely weird!  And it happened to Moses, who had been trained for forty years in the science of his time.  In Exodus 3, he concludes that what he sees is not congruent with what he believes—a burning bush, yet not consumed.  And God speaks… 
After the initial encounter, when the observer somehow realizes that what she sees is the Truth, she may begin to explicate within that initial and all-encompassing encounter, exactly as everything that has been made exists within that awesome singularity called The Beginning.
 
She may ponder and ponder and allow Truth to crystallize into a personal application of that all-encompassing Truth.
Nevertheless, as axioms lead to an unfixable chasm, the lack of such a chasm will not lead to something like axioms: unexplainable assumptions or initial and self-evident truths that would force the observer into one specific initial position.  In Truth, there is no specific initial position.  There is only freedom.  Where axioms will always miss their intention, Truth will always set free.  (For more about Truth, see 14.1 Misunderstandings of the Bible: Is Truth the same thing as Reality?  Truth is a Person in Quantum Phaith.)
We have established that Truth is initially singular.  We have also established that a system that leans on the stacking of facts and certainties will never reach it.  And that means that a system that leans on facts (science, our legal system, philosophy) needs to add a certain component that is not just another fact, to establish some kind of consistency that could pass for truth in order to derive conclusions and verdicts.  Science uses the phrase ‘most likely’ to seal the gap.  Law uses the phrase ‘beyond reasonable doubt’.  In both cases, an appeal is made to the trust of the spectators.  Trust is needed in any kind of theory in order to breach the gap caused by the inherent incompleteness of any system that uses facts for its bricks.
Where o where does trust come from?  The human heart, perhaps?  Intuition?  Not by a long shot.  As Jeremiah  once wrote, “The heart is the most deceitful thing”. (Jeremiah 71:9, my translation)
When Koch came out with his snowflake , mathematicians found it horrendous as it went directly against all intuition that a finite surface could be encompassed by an infinite periphery.  But it did.  Weirdness ruled.  The earth was not flat after all.
Still, theoretical physicists had already surmised of something similar that most likely actually occurs in nature.  Due to extreme space-time curvature, a black hole has an infinite radius and a finite diameter.  Hence, volume is infinite while circumference is far from it.  How is this possible?  It just is.  Intuition is most often flat wrong.  And, what about the universe itself?  It is the only thing in existence with an inside and no outside... Of course, we already know that there is an unobservable outside called God!
What about Quantum Hope
Not only can we not see it, our understanding of it cannot be complete. Incompleteness is inherent in the very nature of Scripture and in its principles, like quantum hope. It is not really so much a matter of Scripture being incomplete than it is that our understanding (or our ability to understand) is incomplete: “For we know in part and we prophesy in part.” (1st Corinthian 13:9)
Heisenberg was probably right when he said, “Therefore, it will never be possible by pure reason to arrive at some absolute truth.” Add the element of irrationality from the previous chapter and it becomes clear that “pure reason itself may not be so pure. So, rephrasing Heisenberg, “Therefore, it will never be possible by [irrational reasoning] to arrive at some absolute truth.” But as Nash demonstrated, you can believe in an absolute truth without having complete evidence to support that belief.
Therefore, incompleteness does not nullify quantum hope. On the contrary, and perhaps counter intuitively, its supports it. So now let’s turn to Scripture and see if we can incompletely and uncertainly, but rationally, ascertain the essence of quantum hope.


Incompleteness and a Jamaican Bobsled Team 
“Derice, a gold medal is a wonderful thing. But if you're not enough without one, you'll never be enough with one.”
 —Irv Blitzer
Cool Runnings is a 1993 Walt Disney Pictures production of an unlikely group of Olympians from the tiny island of Jamaica, who participated in the XV Olympic Winter Games. Trained a sprinters, they competed in the four-man bobsled event in a used sled they called Cool Runnings.
 
When the Jamaican sprinter Derice Bannock (Leon) is disqualified from the Olympic Games due to a silly accident, he envisions the chance to participate in bobsled modality. He meets the dishonored coach Irving Blitzer (John Candy), who is living in the tropical country after two gold medals and elimination due to cheating, and convinces him to coach the first Jamaican Bobsled Team. They form a group with the push-cart driver Sanka Coffie (Doug E. Doug), the sprinter Yul Brenner (Malik Yoba) and the rich Junior Bevil (Rawle D. Lewis). Without any sponsor, they fly to Calgary, Alberta, Canada to participate of the XV Olympic Winter Games. After a dismal first round and ranking in last place, their second round performance vaults them into 8th place. Now considered medal contenders, the world is hyped as they launch into their third run. However, the used sled the had acquired finally fails and the crew crashes. With paramedics rushing to the accident, the team frees themselves from the sled, hoist it over their heads and walk it to the finish line. Four years later they returned to the Winter Olympics as contenders.
 
As the story unfolds, it becomes clear that Derice Bannock, wanting to follow in his father’s Olympic footsteps, feels incomplete. In one of the most moving scenes of the motion picture, Irv Blitzer recounts his cheating incident to Derice.
Irv: [telling Derice why he cheated] It's a fair question. It's quite simple, really. I had to win. You see, Derice, I had made winning my whole life, and when you make winning your whole life, you have to keep on winning, no matter what. Understand? 
Derice Bannock: No, I don't understand. You won two gold medals. You had it all. 
Irv: Derice, a gold medal is a wonderful thing. But if you're not enough without one, you'll never be enough with one. 
[Turns to leave] 
Derice Bannock: Hey coach, how will I know if I'm enough? 
Irv: When you cross that finish line tomorrow, you'll know. 
I am pretty sure that Irv did not know what Paul wrote in Colossians 2:9-10a about completeness. I would guess that Kurt Gödel probably was not aware either.
“For in Him all the fullness of Deity dwells in bodily form, and in Him you have been made complete;” (NASB)
Yet, there are two stories of team members who are struggling with who they are, and searching for a way to be complete. Junior Bevil, who is largely controlled by his over-bearing father, is timid and conflicted. Yul Brenner sees more in Junior, than he sees in himself.
Yul Brenner: Look in the mirror, and tell me what you see! 
Junior Bevill: I see Junior. 
Yul Brenner: You see Junior? Well, let me tell you what I see. I see pride! I see power! I see a bad-ass mother who don't take no crap off of nobody! 
However, new arrives that Junior’s father is coming to Calgary to fetch him and Junior is conflicted about it. 
Junior: [Murmurs] Pride, Power... [Stops elevator] Father, when you look at me, what do you see?
Whitby Bevil: I don't have time for games. 
Junior: Tell me what you see, please!
Whitby Bevil: Alright I'll tell you what I see. I see a lost little boy, who's lucky to have a father who knows what's best for him.
Junior: No, no, no, no you don't know what's best for me father. I am not a lost little boy father, I am a man and I'm an Olympian. I'm staying right here. 
[Elevator door closes with a sad Whitby inside]
Yul: Junior Bevil. You bad-ass mother.

Though not quantum hope, this is a story of hope on at least two levels: hope of competing and hope of completing. And Jamaica is not known for is snow-capped mountains. Irv rightly points out the obstacles that lay before them.
“All right, Derice. Let me lay out some difficulties for you. Snow: you don't have any. It’s nine hundred degrees out there. Time: you don't have any. The Olympics are in three months. And me: you don't have me. As far as I’m concerned, the sport of bobsledding no longer exists. I don't want to do it, I don’t want to coach it, and most of all, and I mean most of all, I don't want to be within two thousand miles of anybody who does. Now did you follow all that?” 
But Derice will not be deterred, and the rest is history.
Speaking of history, let’s look at the history of Chaos. We will do this in the next chapter. We will also explore my “Biblical Model” and wrap up our journey through Quantum Hope with an analysis of Romans 8 and 1st Corinthians 13. I have used a few verses from each frequently through our journey thus far.
Summary 9 
A logical system is always based on axioms. 
A logical system cannot prove the consistency of its own axioms and can hence not prove whether it is true. 
No logical system will ever be able to prove everything. 
Truth cannot be reached by logic! 
Truth is singular (Truth is One).
Gold medal, honors and degrees with not make you complete.
We are only made complete by Christ.

 
 
Chaos Theory for Beginners
- It’s a Jungle Out There  -
The whole history of science has been the gradual realization that events do not happen in an arbitrary manner, but that they reflect a certain underlying order, which may or may not be divinely inspired.
- Stephen Hawking
Life finds a way
Remember Jurassic Park?  Handsome mathematician Doctor Ian Malcolm  (pictured here [38]) explaining to pretty Doctor Sattler why he thought it was unwise to have T-rexes and the likes romping around on an island?  John Hammond, the annoying owner, promised that nothing could go wrong and that all precautions were taken to ensure the safety of visitors.  Dr. Malcolm did not agree.  “Life finds a way,” he said. 
Nature is highly complex, and the only prediction you can make is that she is unpredictable.  The amazing unpredictability of nature is what Chaos Theory looks at.  Why?  Because, nature is marvelous and mysterious instead of being boring and translucent.  Chaos Theory has managed to somewhat capture the beauty of the unpredictable and display it in the most awesome patterns.  Nature, when looked upon with the right kind of eyes, presents herself as one of the most fabulous works of art ever wrought. 
What is Chaos Theory?
Chaos Theory is a mathematical sub-discipline that studies complex systems.  Examples of the complex systems that Chaos Theory helped fathom are earth's weather system, the behavior of water boiling on a stove, migratory patterns of birds, or the spread of vegetation across a continent.  Chaos is everywhere, from nature’s most intimate considerations to art of any kind.  Chaos-based graphics show up all the time, wherever flocks of little space ships sweep across the movie screen in highly complex ways, or awesome landscapes adorn the theater of some dramatic Oscar scene.  Do you remember Ace Ventura dangling from a rope over that abyss, trying to save the little raccoon?  Remember all those beautiful mountains in the background?  That was not a location shot.  That was computer-generated Chaos art.
Complex systems are systems that contain so much motion (so many elements that move) that computers are required to calculate all the various possibilities.  That is why Chaos Theory could not have emerged before the second half of the 20th century.
However, there is another reason that Chaos Theory was born so recently, and that is the ‘Quantum Mechanical Revolution’ and how it ended the ‘deterministic’ era.
Up to the Quantum Mechanical Revolution, people believed that things were directly caused by other things, that what went up had to come down, and that if only we could catch and tag every particle in the universe we could predict events from then on.  Entire governments and systems of belief were (and, sadly, are still) founded on these beliefs, and when Sigmund Freud invented psychoanalysis, he headed out from the idea that malfunctions in the mind are the results of traumas suffered in the past.  Regression would allow the patient to stroll down memory lane, pinpoint the sore spot and rub it away with Freud's healing techniques that were again based on linear cause and effect.
Chaos Theory however taught us that nature most often works in patterns, which are caused by the sum of many tiny pulses. 
Early History
An early proponent of chaos theory was Henri Poincaré.  In the 1880s, while studying the ‘three-body problem’, he found that there can be orbits which are nonperiodic, and yet not forever increasing nor approaching a fixed point. [63] In 1898, Jacques Hadamard published an influential study of the chaotic motion of a free particle gliding frictionlessly on a surface of constant negative curvature. [64] In the system studied, ‘Hadamard's billiards’, Hadamard was able to show that all trajectories are unstable in that all particle trajectories diverge exponentially from one another, with a positive Lyapunov exponent.
Mathematicians under the name of ergodic theory developed much of the earlier theory almost entirely.  G. D. Birkhoff [65], A. N. Kolmogorov [66], M. L. Cartwright and J. E. Littlewood [67], and Stephen Smale carried out later studies, also on the topic of nonlinear differential equations.  Except for Smale, physics directly inspired these studies: the three-body problem in the case of Birkhoff [68], turbulence and astronomical problems in the case of Kolmogorov, and radio engineering in the case of Cartwright and Littlewood.  Although chaotic planetary motion had not been observed, experimentalists had encountered turbulence in fluid motion and nonperiodic oscillation in radio circuits without the benefit of a theory to explain what they were seeing.
Despite initial insights in the first half of the twentieth century, Chaos theory became formalized as such only after mid-century, when it first became evident for some scientists that linear theory, the prevailing system theory at that time, simply could not explain the observed behavior of certain experiments like that of the logistic map.  What mathematicians had beforehand excluded as measure imprecision and simple ‘noise’, chaos theories now considered as a full component of the studied systems.
The main catalyst for the development of chaos theory was the electronic computer.  Much of the mathematics of chaos theory involves the repeated iteration of simple mathematical formulas, which would be impractical to do by hand.  Electronic computers made these repeated calculations practical, while figures and images made it possible to visualize these systems.
How Chaos Theory was born and why
It all started to dawn on people when in 1960 a man named Edward Lorenz  (pictured here [38]) created a weather-model on his computer at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology.  Lorentz’ weather model consisted of an extensive array of complex formulas that kicked numbers around like an old pigskin.  Clouds rose and winds blew, heat scourged or cold came creeping up the breeches.	 
Colleagues and students marveled over the machine because it never seemed to repeat a sequence; it was really quite like the real weather.  Some even hoped that Lorentz had built the ultimate weather-predictor and if one chose the input parameters identical to those of the real weather howling outside the Maclaurin Building, it could mimic earth's atmosphere and would be a precise prophet.
Then one day Lorentz decided to cheat a little bit.  A while earlier, he had let the program run on certain parameters to generate a certain weather pattern and he wanted to take a better look at the outcome.  Instead of letting the program run from the initial settings and calculate the outcome, Lorentz decided to start half way down the sequence by inputting the values that the computer had come up with during the earlier run. 
The computer that Lorentz was working with calculated the various parameters with an accuracy of six decimals; but the printout gave these numbers with a three decimal accuracy.  So, instead of inputting certain numbers (like wind, temperature and stuff like that) as accurate as the computer had them, Lorentz settled for approximations; 5.123456 became 5.123 (for instance).  And that puny little inaccuracy appeared to amplify and cause the entire system to swing out of whack.
 
Exactly how important is all this?  Well, in the case of weather systems, it is very important.  Weather is the total behavior of all the molecules that make up earth's atmosphere; and in the previous chapters, we have established that a tiny particle cannot be accurately pinpointed, due to the Uncertainty Principle!  Moreover, this is the sole reason why weather forecasts begin to be bogus around a day or two into the future.  We cannot get an accurate fix on the present situation, just a mere approximation, and so our ideas about the weather are doomed to fall into misalignment in a matter of hours, and completely into the nebulas of fantasy within days.  Nature will not let herself be predicted. 
Principle (6):
The Uncertainty Principle prohibits accuracy.  Therefore, the initial situation of a complex system cannot be accurately determined, and the evolution of a complex system cannot be accurately predicted.
Attractors
Complex systems often appear too chaotic to recognize a pattern with the naked eye.  Nevertheless, by using certain techniques, large arrays of parameters may be abbreviated into one point in a graph.  In the little rain-or-sunshine graph above, every point represents a complete condition with wind speed, rain fall, air temperature, etc., but by processing these numbers in a certain way they can be represented by one point.  Stacking moment upon moment reveals the ‘little graph’ and offers us some insight in the development of a weather system.
The first Chaos Theorists began to discover that complex systems often seem to run through some kind of cycle, even though situations are rarely exactly duplicated and repeated.  Plotting many systems in simple graphs revealed that often there seems to be some kind of situation that the system tries to achieve, equilibrium of some sort.  For instance, imagine a city of 10,000 people.  In order to accommodate these people, the city will spawn one supermarket, two swimming pools, a library and three churches.  For argument's sake, we will assume that this setup pleases everybody and achieves equilibrium.  But then, the Ben & Jerry's company decides to open an ice cream plant on the outskirts of the town, opening jobs for 10,000 more people.  The town expands rapidly to accommodate 20,000 people; the town adds one supermarket, two swimming pools, one library and three churches, and maintain the equilibrium.  That equilibrium is called an Attractor. 
Now imagine that instead of adding 10,000 people to the original 10,000, 3,000 people move away from the city and 7,000 remain.  The bosses of the supermarket chain calculate that a supermarket can only exist when it has 8,000 regular customers.  So after a while, they shut the store down and the people of the city are left without groceries.  Demand rises and some other company decides to build a supermarket, hoping that a new supermarket will attract new people.  And it does.  But many were already in the process of moving and a new supermarket will not change their plans.
The company keeps the store running for a year and then concludes that there are not enough customers and shut it down again.  People move away.  Demand rises.  Someone else opens a supermarket.  People move in but not enough.  Store closes again.  And so on. 
This awful situation is also some kind of equilibrium, but a dynamic one.  A dynamic kind-of-equilibrium is called a Strange Attractor.  The difference between an Attractor and a Strange Attractor is that an Attractor represents a state to which a system finally settles, while a Strange Attractor represents some kind of trajectory upon which a system runs from situation to situation without ever settling down.
The discovery of Attractors was exciting and explained a lot, but the most awesome phenomenon Chaos Theory discovered was a crazy little thing called Self-Similarity.  Unveiling Self-Similarity allowed people a glimpse of the magical mechanisms that shape our world, and perhaps even ourselves... 
And before you turn to the next page, think about this: A snowflake is an object composed of water molecules.  These molecules do not have a common nerve system, DNA or a chief molecule that calls the shots.  How do these molecules know where to go and hang in order to form a six-pointed star?  And where do they get the audacity to form a different one every time?  How does one molecule in one leg of the flake know which private design the rest of the gang is cruising for, in other legs of the flake, for the tiny molecule a million miles away? 
Chaos and Order
Nature will not let herself be predicted. Or will she? Underlying chaos theory is the idea that order is king. Those fractal display an underlying order and that chaotic storm system would be ordered if we had the computing power to model all of its variables for a prolonged period. 
Was there chaos in the beginning? Though, “The earth was without form, and void; and darkness was on the face of the deep,” we are told that, “the Spirit of God was hovering over the face of the waters.” God is the order to the universe and all that is therein. Paul tells us, “And He is before all things, and in Him all things consist” (Colossian 1:17) That means all things: the weather, chaos, and our seemingly disordered lives.
Chaos and Quantum Hope
Quantum hope can be thought of as an attractor from faith to love—it represents a state to which our “faith system” finally settles in Christ. It is an equilibrium of sorts, certainly measureable, and allows for the recognition of pattern in a life filled with erratic emotional states that may never seem to settle on a single state. Quantum hope is the attractor in our spiritual walk.
So, how does this fit together with our preconceived notions of faith and hope, chaos and order, or reason and insanity? We will take a look at a Biblical model next, that may shed some light on this small matter.

Summary 9
Chaos Theory is a mathematical sub-discipline that studies complex systems.
Complex systems are systems that contain so much motion (so many elements that move) that computers are required to calculate all the various possibilities.
Chaos Theory taught us that nature most often works in patterns, which are caused by the sum of many tiny pulses. 
Nature will not let herself be predicted. 
Complex systems often seem to run through some kind of cycle, even though situations are rarely exactly duplicated and repeated.
Unveiling Self-Similarity allowed people a glimpse of the magical mechanisms that shape our world.

 
 
Inductive Reasoning and the Biblical Model
- Scripture is a priori  -
The deductive method is the mode of using knowledge, and the inductive method the mode of acquiring it. 
	Henry Mayhew 
First Principles
As I have stated from the start, faith and hope for me are a priori—and the Biblical model—and all else that is real for me flows from it.  There are different models to believe in, and these models may not always be the same, or even comparable.  People like to think that the scientific model consists of absolute truth, but no, even the scientific model is just a tool, and accepting it requires faith just as much as accepting the Biblical model.  I think that someday the scientific model and the Biblical model will be found at odds.  I also think that science itself will one day conclude that the Bible is truer than science.  But, that day has not yet come.
Literary Theory
Literary theory in a strict sense is the systematic study of the nature of literature and of the methods for analyzing literature.  However, literary scholarship since the 19th century often includes—in addition to, or even instead of literary theory in the strict sense—considerations of intellectual history, moral philosophy, social prophecy, and other interdisciplinary themes that are of relevance to the way humans interpret meaning.  In humanities in modern academia, the latter style of scholarship is an outgrowth of critical theory and is often simply called ‘theory.’ [69] Consequently, the word ‘theory’ has become an umbrella term for a variety of scholarly approaches to reading texts. 
When we include the Bible under the category of literature—and it is in the strictest sense—then Literary theory applies to the Bible.  I will also argue that the Bible is much more than literature—the Word of Truth—but to some people it is just literature.
Coherence theory of truth
For coherence theories in general, truth requires a proper fit of elements within a whole system.  Very often, though, coherence is taken to imply something more than simple logical consistency; often there is a demand that the propositions in a coherent system lend mutual inferential support to each other.  So, for example, the completeness and comprehensiveness of the underlying set of concepts is a critical factor in judging the validity and usefulness of a coherent system .  A pervasive tenet of coherence theories is the idea that truth is primarily a property of whole systems of propositions, and can be ascribed to individual propositions only according to their coherence with the whole.  Among the assortment of perspectives commonly regarded as coherence theory, theorists differ on the question of whether coherence entails many possible true systems of thought or only a single absolute system.
Some variants of coherence theory claim to characterize the essential and intrinsic properties of formal systems in logic and mathematics. [70] However, formal reasoners are content to contemplate axiomatically independent and sometimes mutually contradictory systems side by side, for example, the various alternative geometries.  Overall, coherence theories have been criticized as lacking justification in their application to other areas of truth.  This is especially the case with respect to assertions about the natural world, empirical data in general, assertions about practical matters of psychology and society, especially when used without support from the other major theories of truth. [70]
Coherence theories distinguish the thought of rationalist philosophers, particularly of Spinoza, Leibniz, and G. W. F. Hegel  (pictured here [37]), along with the British philosopher F. H. Bradley. [70] They have found resurgence also among several proponents of logical positivism, notably Otto Neurath and Carl Hempel. 
Scripture Theory
Scripture Theory is to biblical texts what Chaos Theory is to creation.  Scripture Theory tries to isolate patterns in the narrative, in order to understand it better and to arrive at some kind of system that describes the principles of a text’s governing dynamics within the context of Scripture as a whole.  It is a holistic approach to context, understanding that God cannot contradict Himself, and if Scripture is truly His written Word, then there are no contradictions in it!  The difference between a book and a great book is often the coherency and consistency of patterns in the latter.  [71] One’s Scripture Theory leads to one’s Biblical model.
The Biblical Model
The Biblical model is not universal—my Biblical model is just one of many.  The Biblical model I have in mind is one based on Scripture theory, and I have derived it from many hours of deliberate and methodical study of Scripture.  The model has the following components:
	The Bible is holistic.  Each passage is part of a book, each book is part of a division or testament, and each testament makes up the whole.  If my Biblical model is missing one passage, the model breaks down.  If one adds to Scripture, then my model breaks down again. 
	Autographs—the original source documents—are inerrant, not translations and manuscripts (codexes ).  The books of the Bible attributed to Paul were letters written to churches (e.g., Ephesus) or individuals (e.g., Timothy), authored or dictated by Paul and written in Koine Greek.  The original records have long since vanished from existence.  Bible translations (e.g., NASB) are based on fragments of copied text that have been compiled into manuscripts.  Manuscripts are not inerrant, and even if they were, translations are subject to transliteration errors, contextual errors, cultural biases, etc.  However, it is important to remember:
“Above all, you must understand that no prophecy of Scripture came about by the prophet’s own interpretation of things.  For prophecy never had its origin in the human will, but prophets, though human, spoke from God as they were carried along by the Holy Spirit.” [40]
-2 Peter 1:20-21 (NASB)
	The Holy Spirit (HS) transcends errors.  Errors do not pose obstacles to the HS, and it is the HS that provides correct interpretation as we study a translation or manuscript of the inerrant autographs.  In fact, even if the autographs had errors, they would not prevent the HS from providing correct, inerrant interpretation of God’s Word—the logos, the personification of God’s Word—Christ.
	Context is king!  Every verse in the Bible has a context, within the larger whole—paragraph, chapter, etc.—as does every book.  Proper application and correct interpretation depends on the context holistically—literally, culturally, linguistically, semiotically, etc.  Translations my not accurately portray the context for linguistic, semiotic, and cultural standpoints.  Hence, one must carefully study the original culture, language, and symbols.  In interpreting Scripture, there is both an immediate context and a broader context.  The immediate context of a verse is the paragraph (or paragraphs) or the biblical book in question.  One should always consult the immediate context when interpreting Bible verses.  The broader context is the whole of Scripture.  The entire Scripture is the context and guide for understanding particular passages of Scripture.  We must keep in mind that the interpretation of a specific passage must not contradict the total teaching of Scripture on a point.  Individual verses do not exist as isolated fragments, but as parts of a whole.  The exposition of these verses, therefore, must involve exhibiting them in right relation both to the whole and to each other.  “Scripture interprets Scripture.”  As J. I. Packer puts it, “if we would understand the parts, our wisest course is to get to know the whole.” [72]
	There is only one correct interpretation of Scripture.  Though there may be many applications in one verse of Scripture, there is one and only one correct interpretation.  Interpretation is an extraction of the author’s meaning, a correct conception of behavior, and a correct rendering of the dynamics.  Interpretation rarely jumps out from the page at first glance—unless the HS supernaturally provides it.  There are more than just words on a page in Scripture; though some are static, many are dynamic—and we will latter see that behavior of a thing is more important than the thing in Hebrew.  Paul implores Timothy to “righty dividing the word of truth.”  (2 Timothy 2:15) [some versions use accurately or correctly handling.]
	The Bible never contradicts itself.  A seemingly contradictory statement is probably an interpretation taken out of context, or a misinterpretation, both of which violate the Biblical model.  “O Timothy!  Guard what was committed to your trust, avoiding the profane and idle babblings and contradictions of what is falsely called knowledge—by professing it some have strayed concerning the faith.” [61] (1 Timothy 6:20-21) Paul did not mean that the Bible contradicts itself when he wrote this to Timothy, but it seems clear that there are others who do create ‘contradictions', but these were not committed to Timothy’s trust, as Truth was.
	Presuppositions must be suppressed.  Principle (10a) from Quantum Phaith states, “Our beliefs are not valid instruments to analyze either reality in general or any specific pattern.”  Beliefs and faith are not the same things.  Belief is the psychological state in which an individual holds a proposition or premise to be true [73].  We can “learn” or inherent our beliefs from a theological position (Calvinism, Catholicism, neo-Orthodoxy, etc.), and from secular positions (science, sociology, psychology, etc.).  Some of our beliefs may be ‘valid’ and others might fly in the face of the Spirit—they might be absolutely wrong, even if we learned in Sunday School!  In inductive Bible study, we must honestly put aside our presuppositions and approach Scripture afresh.
	The Bible is literature and correct Genre Judgment  is called for.  A ‘literal’ approach to Scripture recognizes that the Bible contains a variety of literary genres, each of which has certain peculiar characteristics that one must recognize in order to interpret the text properly.  Biblical genres include the historical (e.g., Acts), the dramatic epic (e.g., Job), poetry (e.g., Psalms), wise sayings (e.g., Proverbs), and apocalyptic writings (e.g., Revelation).  Obviously, an incorrect genre judgment will lead one astray in interpreting Scripture.  A parable should not be treated as history, nor should poetry or apocalyptic literature (both of which contain many symbols) be treated as straightforward narrative.  The wise interpreter allows knowledge of genres to influence how he or she approaches individual biblical texts, to determine accurately what the biblical author was intending to communicate.  Even though the Bible contains a variety of literary genres and many figures of speech, the biblical authors most often employed literal statements to convey their ideas.  Where they use a literal means to express their ideas, the Bible expositor must employ a corresponding means to explain these ideas—namely, a literal approach.  A literal method of interpreting Scripture gives to each word in the text the same basic meaning it would have in normal, ordinary, customary usage—whether employed in writing, speaking, or thinking.  
	Historical considerations are especially important in properly interpreting the Word of God.  The Christian faith is based on historical fact.  Indeed, Christianity rests on the foundation of the historical Jesus, whose earthly life represents God’s full and objective self-communication to humankind (John 1:18).  Human beings saw and heard Jesus as God’s ultimate revelation (1 John 1:1-3).  This is why He could forcefully claim, “If ye had known me, ye should have known my Father also”. [41] (John 14:7)  The apostle Paul, when speaking with the religious men of Athens, affirmed that the reality of the future judgment of all humanity rests on the objective, historical evidence for the resurrection of Jesus (Acts 17:16f.).  New Testament writers recorded this evidence for us in the Gospels; their accounts were eyewitness testimony and they wrote very close in time to the events on which they report.  Based on how people respond to God’s objective, historical revelation contained in Scripture, they will spend eternity in a real heaven or a real hell.
	One must use proper methodology when interpreting the Bible.  The word ‘method’ comes from the Greek word methodos, which literally means ‘a way or path of transit’.  Methodology in Bible study is therefore concerned with ‘taking the proper path in order to arrive at Scriptural truth’.  This implies that improper paths can be taken.  Of course, proper methodology is essential to many fields of endeavor.  A heart surgeon does not perform open-heart surgery without following proper, objective methodology.  (Would you trust a heart surgeon to operate on you who told you that he intended to discard objective methodology, and instead opting for a subjective approach?—cutting you where he feels like cutting you.)  Improper methodology in interpreting Scripture is nothing new.  Even in New Testament times, the apostle Peter warned that there are teachings in the inspired writings of Paul “which the untaught and unstable distort, as they do also the rest of the Scriptures, to their own destruction” [41] (2 Peter 3:16, NASB).  This verse tells us that mishandling the Word of God can be very dangerous.  Indeed, mishandling the Word of God is a ‘path’ to destruction.  Contrary to the practices of some false teachers in Corinth, the apostle Paul assured his readers that he faithfully handled the Word of God (2 Corinthians 4:2).  Paul admonished young Timothy to follow his example: “Study to show thyself approved unto God, a workman that needeth not to be ashamed, rightly dividing the word of truth” [41] (2 Timothy 2:15, KJV).
The Biblical model and Quantum Physics
Matter is made up of what atoms and molecules are made of, meaning anything made of protons, neutrons, and electrons. [74] As an analogy, Scripture (matter) is made up of molecules (history, poems, epistles, etc.), which comprise of paragraphs (atoms), which consist of sentences and words (sub-atomic particles), held together by rules of grammar (quantum foam and forces).  If you leave out a sentence (electron), the atom changes, which changes the molecule, which changes the matter.  Proper interpretation requires looking at the whole of Scripture, guided by the Holy Spirit.
Pauli’s Exclusion Principle states that two electrons that have identical values for their four characteristics cannot occupy the same sphere around the nucleus.  In a manner, two interpretations of a verse in Scripture cannot occupy the sphere around truth—the Word of Truth.  The Word of Truth is comprised of pieces of truth obtained through Scripture, and a piece of truth derived from the same element (e.g., a verse) that has two interpretations is not a piece truth—only one correct interpretation leads to Truth.
Matter does not annihilate itself.  This requires antimatter—an electron colliding with a positron.  In a like manner, Scripture does not contradict itself.  This would require anti-truth, and the two would ‘annihilate each other’.  When Scripture appears to contain contradictions, it is usually due to interpreting out of context.
As gravity is the king of the universe, context is the king of interpretation!  Gravity is the only force to which all particles are subjected.  Interpretation must be subjected to context.
Some real geniuses, like Heisenberg and Schrödinger, could probably pick up a quantum physics book—assuming they do not yet know any quantum physics—read a paragraph or two and immediately understand its meaning.  I cannot do likewise.  For me, it takes many hours of deliberate, methodical study.  The same is true for Scripture.  There are some days when you look at a verse, and the Spirit instantly reveals its meaning—its correct interpretation.  That seldom happens for me.  I have to approach the study of Scripture methodically.
Exegesis
Exegesis (from the Greek ἐξήγησις from ἐξηγεῖσθαι ‘to lead out’) is a critical explanation or interpretation of a text, especially a religious text.  Traditionally the term was used primarily for exegesis of the Bible; however, in contemporary usage, it has broadened to mean a critical explanation of any text, and the term ‘Biblical exegesis’ is used for greater specificity.  The goal of Biblical exegesis is to explore the meaning of the text that then leads to discovering its significance or relevance.
Exegesis includes a wide range of critical disciplines: textual criticism  is the investigation into the history and origins of the text, but exegesis may include the study of the historical and cultural backgrounds for the author, the text, and the original audience.  Other analysis includes classification of the type of literary genres present in the text, and an analysis of grammatical and syntactical features in the text itself.
The terms exegesis and hermeneutics have been used interchangeably.  However, hermeneutics is a more widely defined discipline of interpretation theory: hermeneutics includes the entire framework of the interpretive process, encompassing all forms of communication: written, verbal and nonverbal, while exegesis focuses primarily on the written text.
Inductive Method of Bible Study—Exegesis 
No one particular thing sets inductive Bible study apart from the study of the Bible as it is conducted by many intelligent laypersons, pastors, and biblical scholars (‘exegetes’) around the world.  For example, inductive Bible study shares with responsible exegesis everywhere a concern for literary context, and for the precise meaning of biblical terms derived through proper word study.  The distinctiveness of inductive Bible study involves its radical openness to the meaning of the biblical text wherever the evidence may lead, its methodological emphases, and the intentional way in which it seeks to relate the various components of Bible study to one another.  Consequently, we should consider the history of inductive Bible study as part of the church’s ongoing attempt to understand its scriptures well.
Harper and White
The Inductive Bible Study movement began with the work of William Rainey Harper (below left [37])  and especially the work of his student and associate, Wilbert Webster White (below right [37]).
        
Wilbert Webster White was born in Wooster, Ohio, in 1863, into a pious Presbyterian family.  White graduated from the College of Wooster with distinction in 1883, and upon his graduation from Xenia Theological Seminary in 1885, he served pastorates in the United Presbyterian Church. 
While a seminary student, White participated in summer school classes at Morgan Park Theological Seminary, where he came under the instruction of William Rainey Harper.  Harper was most impressed with White’s intellectual gifts and persuaded him to leave the pastorate for the pursuit of doctoral studies in Semitic languages at Yale University, with a view toward his eventually becoming a professor of Old Testament.
Through a number of influences at Yale, White became interested in exploring the process of learning—the educational method.  Later, White and the seminary he founded would develop a fruitful conversation with a great teacher and educational theorist from New York University, Herman Harrell Horne.  During this period, too, White became convinced of the significance of relationships; he came to see that the key to understanding anything is to consider its major components and the ways in which these components relate to one another. 
Under Harper, White encountered higher-critical study of the Bible.  In fact, Harper’s critical views, particularly on the dating and authorship of the Pentateuch, were met with suspicion by many of his fellow Baptists.  White was not convinced of Harper’s views regarding some of these issues.  But, Harper acknowledged the limits of this critical study of the Bible; and White appreciated Harper’s recognition that the study of the Bible must not be reduced to matters of authorship or sources. 
White also appreciated Harper’s insistence that, generally speaking, the emphasis should be upon the study of the Bible in the student’s own language; for Harper recognized that people think in their native language, and that consequently students should be saturated with the Bible in their own tongue.  Indeed, Harper and White believed that the excitement that comes from the study of the Bible in the vernacular would lead many students to pursue enthusiastically the original languages.  Thus, as White was struggling with Harper’s presentation of higher-critical views he also encountered, through Harper, “the method of the study of the Bible by books in the mother tongue,” as he would later put it.
Both Harper and White believed that the suspicions or doubts regarding the Bible that emerged from higher-critical study could be adequately addressed by the direct literary study of the Bible.  They believed that as the student encountered the message of the Bible by examining the Bible book-by-book, the student would experience the compelling force and authenticity of the Bible; in the process of pursuing its proper study readers would find that the Bible authenticates itself.
In his classes, Harper combined detailed critical study of minute points with the holistic study of whole biblical books or groups of books in the mother tongue.  In other words, Harper balanced a deductive approach that presented scholarly opinions to the student to impose these upon the text, with an inductive approach that involved students immersing themselves in the observation of the text with a view towards drawing their own conclusions regarding its meaning. 
Upon earning his Ph.D. in Semitics from Yale University, White joined the faculty of Xenia Seminary.  However, White had been profoundly influenced by Harper; and he consequently felt constrained by the stilted, doctrinaire character of this traditional ‘old-line’ denominational seminary.  At Xenia a deductive approach was practiced, in which students were spoon-fed information and told what to think, over against an inductive approach that would give students the resources and encouragement to discover truth, and especially biblical truth, for themselves. 
While teaching at Xenia White continued Harper’s practice of giving over a portion of his instruction in courses in Hebrew and Old Testament literature to the study of larger swaths of the English Bible.  During his years of teaching at Xenia, White was also exposed to Andrew Murray’s book, “With Christ in the School of Prayer”.  Out of that encounter, White experienced a deeper level of spiritual intimacy with Christ.  White became convinced that seminary education must not only center on the study of the Bible, but that it must also facilitate authentic spiritual formation.
White’s disillusionment with traditional seminary education, such as he experienced at Xenia, led him to leave Xenia to accept an invitation from Dwight Moody to teach at Moody’s recently inaugurated Bible College in Chicago.  There White came to appreciate the value of a learning environment.  But White chafed under what he considered a lack of intellectual rigor and a superficial spirituality.  He became convinced that a great need existed for a new type of seminary, one that would serve as an alternative to the traditional seminary that lacked curricular coherence around the centrality of an inductive study of the Bible, and an alternative to the Bible colleges, which, at least at that time, were characterized, by obscurantism and academic weakness.
It was during this period that his brother, J. Campbell White, on behalf of the International Committee of the YMCA, invited Wilbert W. White to go with him working among college students in Calcutta, India.  There White became convinced of the need, also in India, for knowledge of the Bible and for right method to study and teach it.  White taught at United Presbyterian mission stations in India; and he held fourteen conventions attended by missionaries and college students from all over India.  Missionaries and Indian students alike expressed the need for an emphasis on the direct study of the Bible and a method that would make such study fruitful.
On his return trip, White stopped in England, where he presented Bible studies in the YWCA in London.  When he came back to England the next year (1899), he taught over 12,000 people in his ten-week Bible studies in London.  He returned for a third series of meetings in March 1900, when he gave studies in England, Northern Ireland, and Scotland.  At this time, White presented a plan to Lord Overtoun for a school modeled on the Teacher’s College at Columbia University, but with a Bible-centered curriculum.  Overtoun gave White 500 pounds to establish such a school in America, with the hope that White would establish a similar school in London.  The hope of a London school was never realized; but the American school would become The Biblical Seminary in New York.
The Biblical Seminary in New York
On October 29, 1900, the first public meeting was held in connection with the ‘Bible Teachers College’.  Classes began on January 8, 1901 in Montclair, New Jersey.  The school moved to Manhattan in 1902 (where it was eventually located in a 12-story building on East 49th Street) and in 1921 the name was changed to The Biblical Seminary in New York.  The seminary was fully accredited by the Board of Regents of the University of the State of New York. 
The purpose of the school was “to make the study of the Bible in the mother tongue the organizing, dominating element in a school of preparation for Christian leadership.”  C.R. Eberhardt noted in his book, The Bible in the Making of Ministers, that it was established out of the conviction “that the ministry must be a bibliocracy, that it must know its Bible better than any other book.” [75] Eberhardt’s book is the most authoritative account of the work of W. W. White and the beginnings of the inductive Bible study movement.  The school would chart a course between the fundamentalism of inerrancy and the fundamentalism of higher-critical dogma.  The school was to emphasize that the Scripture itself must be allowed to establish its own criteria both as to its interpretation and its authority. 
The seminary reflected the emphases of Wilbert W. White: (1) a biblio-centric curriculum around the inductive study of the Bible in the vernacular; (2) concern for effective educational principles and practices to facilitate the student’s own learning; (3) commitment to the devotional life of prayer toward spiritual maturity; (4) a cosmopolitan, global perspective; and (5) commitment to evangelical Christianity and especially the authority of the scriptures.
The Biblical Seminary in New York flourished under the presidency of Wilbert W. White, who died in 1944, and his immediate successors.  Inductive biblical study was developed and enhanced there through such teachers as Howard Tillman Kuist  (below left [37]); Donald G. Miller  (below right [37]); and Robert A. Traina.  Traina developed the relationship between inductive Bible study and traditional exegesis and became Vice President for Academic Affairs and the F. M. Ada Thompson Professor of English Bible at Asbury Theological Seminary. 
         
Several significant Christian leaders were to graduate from The Biblical Seminary, including the noted Christian philosopher Jerry Gill, Pat Robertson, and Eugene Peterson.  The inductive approach has influenced many scholars of global recognition, including Brevard Childs, James Luther Mays and Patrick D. Miller, Jr., and William J. Abraham.  The inductive approach has also become central in the teaching of organizations such as InterVarsity Christian Fellowship and Youth With a Mission.  Perhaps the center of serious work in inductive Bible study today is Asbury Theological Seminary, which has a department of Inductive Bible Study in which are housed six full-time faculty.
In a Nutshell
To some degree, what you are told inductive Bible study means will depend upon which theologian you are asking.  But fundamentally, or in a nutshell, it is a term of logic which means, interpreting scripture with no presupposition¬—no pre-judgement—by the text itself, through analyzing the evidence and drawing out of it logical conclusions.  Biblical Induction literally means ‘out of’, or ‘introduced from the Bible’.  The Bible is the source of specifics from which one derives general evidence—and thus doctrine.
It is only natural, since God created all things and in Him all things hold together, that His Word be the basis of all things. And though it may seem weird, His Word if the source for interpreting His Word.

Chapter 10 Summary
Inductive reasoning starts with first principles
Inductive reasoning has roots in literary theory
When we include the Bible under the category of literature—and it is in the strictest sense—then Literary theory applies to the Bible
Some variants of coherence theory claim to characterize the essential and intrinsic properties of formal systems in logic and mathematics
Scripture Theory is to biblical texts what Chaos Theory is to creation
The Biblical model is not universal
Our Biblical model is based on Scripture Theory
Our Biblical model borrows from elements of quantum physics
Exegesis is a critical explanation or interpretation of a text
The distinctiveness of inductive Bible study involves its radical openness to the meaning of the biblical text wherever the evidence may lead, its methodological emphases, and the intentional way in which it seeks to relate the various components of the Bible to one another

 
 
Romans 8: The Story of Quantum Hope
Getting to the core of the truth about hope is much like our Journey into the infinitesimally small. We have to travel through the entirety of scripture and through great theological imagery to find that which we call hope. Like quantum foam, hope has always been there. It pre-existed with the Trinity out the constraints of time and when the earth had not yet been formed and our bodies had been molded from the clay. And sometimes, because our minds have been on loftier ideas, like justification, predestination, and sanctification, we have failed to see this tiny yet measurable bit of hope. Now let’s see if we can discover it in Romans 8.
Summary of Romans 8
Theologians have studied Paul’s letter to the Romans for ages and Chapter 8 seems to be one of their favorites. I cannot blame them. After the internal struggle that Paul expressed at the end of Chapter 7 it is refreshing to see him open Romans 8 with these words: “There is therefore now no condemnation to them which are in Christ Jesus…” These words are for those who have put their faith and trust in Jesus Christ as their Savior. Wow, that is really awesome news! We are free from sin and death. However, Jesus Christ was not and died in our place. We are free from punishment (v. 2). In Adam we are sinners who deserve punishment by death (Romans 5). Jesus accepted our punishment on the cross. In Christ we are justified in God’s sight by faith in the finished work of Jesus (Romans 8:33, 34).
Just as many theologian think that Romans 8 is about justification apart from the old law and new life with God by the indwelling of His spirit. And they are not wrong, for Romans 8 does espouse those ideas. However, I think they missed the diamond on account of all the gold. Had the sport been invented, they would have seen that Romans 8 is a story about a boxing match.
Muhammad Ali on Hope
“If my mind can conceive it and my heart can believe it, then I can achieve it.”
Muhammad Ali (born Cassius Marcellus Clay Jr. on January 17, 1942) is an American former professional boxer, generally considered among the greatest heavyweights in the sport's history. Now a founding member of Athletes for Hope, and substantial contributor to the awareness and research efforts of Parkinson’s disease, Ali was a controversial and polarizing figure during his early career. Ali is now highly regarded for the skills he displayed in the ring plus the values he exemplified outside of it: religious freedom, racial justice and the triumph of principle over expedience. He is one of the most recognized sports figures of the past 100 years, crowned “Sportsman of the Century” by Sports Illustrated and “Sports Personality of the Century” by the BBC. 
Wherever there was a heavyweight title match to be fought, Ali found hope. In his first title bout against champion Sonny Liston, Ali was a 7 to 1 underdog. When Liston did not answer the bell in the seventh round, Ali (the Cassius Clay), at age 22, became the youngest heavy weight champion in the history of boxing.
A Heavyweight Champion’s Fall
Think about Roman 8 this way. Satan was the heavyweight champion of the world and had been since Adam sinned. Satan ruled the world—it was all his. But good challenged Satan to a fight for the tile and sent his only begotten son to take on the champ. It was to be a 12 round event. Jesus did rather well in the early part of the match. He healed this sick, gave sight to the blind, tuned a fish into a buffet at Long John Silver’s, and even raised people from the grave, where Satan had intended them to remain. Satan was furious. The title was all he had, and he was not about to let this Jesus take it from him. So, he got to Jesus’s manager and slipped him a bribe. That was enough for Judas, so he took the bribe and began to betray Jesus, weakening him. And in the end, during the 12th round, Satan threw a strikeout punch, and Jesus went down hard. And before the ten-count, Jesus was pronounced dead, and everyone, including those in Jesus’ corner thought the fight was over. But, just before the ten-count, Jesus did something no one expected: he got up—the dead man rose. He got up and with one single punch, he gave Satan and all that he stood for—sin and death—a death blow! Christ defeated Satan and Death, once and for all. He freed the world from the dominion of Satan, at least for those who would come over to His corner (Hebrews 2:14-15).
The Prize
So, Christians are no longer condemned under the law, for Jesus has come and sin and death got their collective butts kicked. Thus, we are no longer slaves to the law.  Instead, Christians live under “the law of the Spirit.” This is kind of like the laws of the Torah, but without worrying about following all 613 individual rules. Circumcision, for example, is optional (which is good news for male converts). God, through Christ, did what the law couldn't—he gave sin and Satan a direct punch in the face sin in the face, scored a knock-out, and reunited the world with him again. Nice work, Jesus. Now those who stand in Jesus’ corner are victorious as well.
However, those that do not believe in Christ, the ones that did not come over to his corner, are missing out on his victory over sin and death. They just walk around like ordinary, puny humans, thinking of ordinary, puny things. They can’t possibly be thinking of God or following his laws because they don't believe in Christ.
But believers have lives and hearts that are filled with the spirit of God, and they’re going to enjoy Christ’s victory forever. Those who stand in Christ’s corner have been adopted into God’s family. They’re his sons and daughters and he would totally do anything for them. Sure, it's true, people are suffering, and poor Satan does not realize he can never regain the title. Moreover, those in Christ’s corner are victorious, but their victory is in Christ in the heavenly places. Their bodies are still in the world that Satan believes is his own and bad things continue to happen. But all that's oaky. It's gonna work out. God is working it out for good for those who stand in Christ’s corner and are loving Him. Really. Plus, later, the rewards are going to receive in Christ’s kingdom far outweigh all the bad stuff everyone has been going through. 
Every part of creation is waiting for God. Soon, everyone and everything is going to be set free from sin and death and evil. It's all going to be awesome for the people who are standing with Christ in his corner, and walking with God now—well, things are gonna work out for them big time.
God sent his son to pound sin and Satan into the ground once and for all—to die for us. And he died, but rose up to win the fight. Don't you think he'll help us with all the other stuff we're going through? Though it may not seem so, the Big Guy always has your back. It doesn't matter if Christians are arrested or persecuted or condemned or even killed—nothing is going to separate them from the love of God.
You got to love those sports analogies!
Romans 8 and Hope
But was does this have to do with hope? When Paul wrote this letter to the Romans, he was inspired by the Holy Spirit, and the spirit made him write something that may seem small and insignificant. However, no matter how small a quantity, it can still be important—who though a boson would be significant? Right in the middle of a story about a boxing match between Satan, the reigning champion of the world, and the underdog, Jesus Christ, Paul writes:
For in this hope we were saved. Now hope that is seen is not hope. For who hopes for what he sees? But if we hope for what we do not see, with perseverance we wait eagerly for it. (Romans 8:24-25)
I don’t get it. What’s to hope for? What is there still to? The fight happened, Jesus knocked the heck out of of sin and Satan. He defeated death and was declared the victor. He got a crown and got to go sit right next to God in heaven. What is there still to to hope for? This is a story about fighting against evil and kicking its butt! V-I-C-T-O-R-Y! That spells victory!
But Christ ascended into heaven to sit at the right hand of God. He did not take those in His corner with Him, not even him coaching and management team. Coach Peter was crucified. Sports-writer Paul was executed. Not a single one escaped death! Every day, those who cheer for Christ also suffer and die. They contract horrible diseases, sustain terrible injuries, are murdered, are executed, and the victor just lets it happen while He is enjoying his victory part with God. Yuk!
You know, Jesus’ team was looking for delivery from this present world. They were looking for a king to establish his kingdom, right in the now! But they did not understand the story. Yes, it was a story about a battle and a victory, but is was more than that. Those are big things, really big things. In fact, so big than it made it too easy to miss a small, yet very important thing, actually two small and important things. First, there has to be a final battle, because Satan could not bear to believe he had been defeated once and for all, so he demanded a re-match. Moreover, God with his infinite grace wants to get more fans in Jesus’ corner before the re-match. So, even though it is over, it is not over. 
Second, Romans eight is not a story about the greatest fight the world had ever seen, it is about hope. It is the hope of victory, the hope that sin and death are conquered, the hope of an eternal relationship with God, and the hope of a new heaven and a new earth, for the battle took place in a realm that we cannot see. The victory occurred in a boxing ring that our eyes cannot behold. “For now I see in a mirror dimly, but then face to face.” What Romans eight assures us of is that no matter what has happened, is happening now, or will happen in the future, we have this unseen hope to hang onto. And this hope is not just a feeling or emotion, and not something that is tangible that we can touch or fell with our hands. It is quantum hope—a hope so infinitesimally tiny and yet too big for us to comprehend. Thus Paul reminds us, right in the middle of his story about the fight of the millennium, that we have this hope: For in this hope we were saved. Now hope that is seen is not hope. For who hopes for what he sees? But if we hope for what we do not see, with perseverance we wait eagerly for it. (Romans 8:24-25)
When we are up to our ears in the world, sick, destitute, imprisoned, persecuted, abandoned, injured and seemingly hopeless, Paul reminds us that we have this tiny bit of hope to persevere for. We cannot see it, taste it, feel it or hear it, and yet it is a hope that is so assured that we can count on it as if it were a cure, a fortune, a get-out-of-jail-free card and something as tangible as the ground we walk upon. It is a solid and assured hope. A hope that though unseen, is measureable—a hope that guarantees us that there is no separation from the Love of Christ. It is a quantum hope!
Conclusion
Paul writes about this hope in Roman 8 and the final five verses of shows us that we can enjoy the grace of God through Jesus Christ, and that this grace is not temporary. Those who are alive in Christ have the eternal security that they will never be separated from the love of Christ.
Beyond the natural things that can happen to a man, Paul lists things completely out of our control to show how secure we are in Christ. He says that he is convinced that death and life are no match for God’s love. Angels, principalities and powers have no authority over those who are in Christ. The list continues with the present and future as well as all creation being named as things which cannot separate us from the love of Christ.
Is it any wonder that this book and chapter in the Bible is so well loved? It is an encouraging and heart-warming reminder that we have such a loving Heavenly Father. He is merciful and gracious to everyone. For those that are in Christ Jesus, not only are we free from the condemnation that we deserve for the sinful creatures that we are, but we can also be sure that because of the grace of God (grace that is not temporary) we can also be sure that we will never be separated from the love of Christ. This is our hope, unseen, yet assured; untouchable yet tangible.
Romans 8 Commentary
You have my $0.02 worth about the gist of Romans 8. Now let me dissect properly.
Romans was written by the Apostle Paul, back in the day when Paul was writing stuff, not before and not after. Bible scholars have their double-top secret ways of determining who wrote what and when, so for instance, Paul do not write Hebrews. But he did write Romans, so my elementary deduction, he wrote Romans 8, which is very Paul-like.
Paul ends chapter 7 of Romans discussing the Law and sin. He says in the last five verses:
21 So I find it to be a law that when I want to do right, evil lies close at hand. 22 For I delight in the law of God, in my inner being, 23 but I see in my members another law waging war against the law of my mind and making me captive to the law of sin that dwells in my members. 24 Wretched man that I am! Who will deliver me from this body of death? 25 Thanks be to God through Jesus Christ our Lord! So then, I myself serve the law of God with my mind, but with my flesh I serve the law of sin.
Here Paul is describing the inner battle that all of us really have, if we are honest. We know what is right, but do not do it. When we try to be righteous, evil rushes in and attacks. There is this constant ware of right and wrong raging inside of use. Who will win?
Verse 1
“Therefore there is now no condemnation for those who are in Christ Jesus.”
Then Paul launches into chapter 8, saying “therefore”. Therefore is an important words signifying a transition—one of conclusion and of hope. Other translations use “so now”, and Paul provides the answer to sin and death, by telling about a boxing match—whoops, that was my version. 
 “So now”! Sean Connery said these very same two word to Elliot Ness (played by Kevin Costner) in The Untouchables. These Feds were going after Al Capone, and Ness was determined to do it within the law. Try as they may, they could not trap the man. Obviously dirty, no one could find any dirt on him. Now, Sean Connery lay dying on his kitchen floor, cut down by machine guns, and in his dying breath whispers to ness this question: “So now what are you prepared to do?”
“So now”, Paul says, “there is now no condemnation for those who are in Christ Jesus.” Wait! After all we have or have not done, there is no condemnation? We are off the hook? Paul goes on to explain why this is so, but embroidered in that one statement, with those few words, is a tiny glimmer of hope. Even if Paul had contracted writer’s block and wrote nothing further, there is some of hope tightly woken in “there is no condemnation.” So, right off the bat, we discover that Romans 8, with all of its important theological concepts and precepts, is simply about hope!
Verse 2
“For the law of the Spirit of life has set you free in Christ Jesus from the law of sin and death.”
Many Christians think we are free from the law. We are not! The only thing that happened was a change in jurisdiction. We move from Moses County, under the Mosaic Law, to Jesus County, under the “law of the Spirit.” The law in Moses County was external, written on stone tablets. The law in Jesus County is internal, written on our hearts. The former laws could not be kept no matter how hard we tried. The latter laws are ones that we cannot help but keep, yet it is not us, but Christ within us. Judge Jesus id both law maker and law keep. In fact, as we found that faith is a Person, and Hope is a Person, so the law is a Person: Jesus Christ.
I am reminded of a story of a French soldier during the Napoleonic wars. The young soldier lay outstretched on the surgeon’s table with a bullet lodged I his chest. The young soldier say to the surgeon, “Cut deeper doctor, cut deeper, and you will find the name of Napoleon written on my heart.” As For King and Country wrote, “It's written on my soul; Hope's what we crave” (see Preface). What is written on your heart?
Verse 3(a)
“For God has done what the law, weakened by the flesh, could not do.”
And this is the crux of the matter, our flesh then and now, could and cannot keep the Law. In times past, the high priest had to make a sacrifice annually to settle the matter of sin. Jesus, the High Priest, made the sacrifice once and for all (Hebrews 7:26-28). There is still a requirement for sin to be dealt with—that is God’s justice. Yet Christ paid the price for sin one time—an act—to perpetually pay the price for all and all time—a continuous result. When I stand before the throne of Judgment, my only plea is Christ, and Christ’s blood covers me for eternity.
Verse 3(b)-4
“By sending his own Son in the likeness of sinful flesh and for sin, he condemned sin in the flesh, 4 in order that the righteous requirement of the law might be fulfilled in us, who walk not according to the flesh but according to the Spirit.”
What did God do that the law could not? He sent his son, in our likeness. And it was Christ the Son who was condemned in the flesh, so that in Gods’ system of justice in Jesus County, the requirement of the law could be fulfilled. Christ’s death paid the price for sin, and his resurrection defeat sin and death with a knock-out punch. And now that debt is fulfilled in us by Christ in us and His Spirit, which dwells in us. When we get pulled over for running a stop sign in Jesus County, the officer does not ask for proof of insurance. Instead, he asks for proof of assurance, our hope in Christ.
Verse 5
“For those who live according to the flesh set their minds on the things of the flesh, but those who live according to the Spirit set their minds on the things of the Spirit.”
It is a matter of the mind, a mental game if you will. Back in the day, I used to oversee the training of cadets at the United States Military Academy, during summers. At age 43, I would go through training with them to ensure the training was adequate to prepare them for tough duty, and to motivate them as well. The training support personnel from the 82nd Airborne were thrilled to see a 43 year old Lieutenant Colonel out run, out crawl, out climb, out shoot and out swim three quarters of the Corps of Cadets, including the football players. When asked how I managed to stay ahead of the 19 year olds, I would reply: “It is 10 percent physical and 90 percent mental.” We can do that which we set our minds on doing and if we have fatigue and failure on our mind, our bodies will fail. 
Paul reminded us to set our minds on the victory of Christ over the flesh, buy saying that if we set our minds on the things of the Spirit, we will live according to the Spirit. In other words, do not dwell on what you can or cannot do in the flesh at age 43, rather set your mind on the immeasurable strength of Christ and the victory He has already won.
Verse 6
“For to set the mind on the flesh is death, but to set the mind on the Spirit is life and peace.”
If I had allowed myself to think that I could have trained with the Corps of Cadets under the strength of my flesh, I would have fallen, hard. But with my mind on Christ, I never considered what I could or could not physically do. Instead, I had the peaceful assurance of hope in Christ that gave me the power to lift a foot and place it forward, one after another until the task was accomplished. Again, that tiny, measurable bit of hope sustained me.
Verse 7
“For the mind that is set on the flesh is hostile to God, for it does not submit to God’s law; indeed, it cannot.”
If I had attempted, with my 43 year old body, to negotiate an obstacle course, and then to run three and half miles in full combat gear, through the woods, swim 50 meters across a lake using nothing more than than a make-shift raft using a poncho, and then run another half mile to the finish line, I would still be standing defeated in front of the first obstacle. Had my mind been set on my flesh, I would have started out in a defeated condition. In in that state, I could do nothing beyond what my weak body could of itself do, and that would not have been much, certainly not enough. In my flesh, I cannot; but, with the assurance of the hope I have in Christ Jesus, I can!
Verse 8
“Those who are in the flesh cannot please God.”
 Enough said. But lets’ put it in mathematical form:
Axiom 1: Man can please God if and only if Man is not in the flesh.
If and only if (iff) is a strict mathematical construct. Compound sentences of the form “P if and only if Q” are true when P and Q are both false or are both true; this compound sentence is false otherwise. It says that P and Q have the same truth values; when “P if and only if Q” is true, it is often said that P and Q are logically equivalent. In fact, when “P if and only Q” is true, P can substitute for Q and Q can substitute for P in other compound sentences without changing the truth.  Let’s try it out:
Assume that “man can please God” is false and also “Man is not in the flesh” is false. If the statement in Axiom 1 true?
Conjecture 1: Man cannot please God iff Man is in the flesh.
These are the false form of the statements of Axiom 1. Is Conjecture 1 true? What is we reverse the order? Is it still true when both statements are the false version of Axiom 1?
Conjecture 2: Man is in the flesh iff Man cannot please God 
Is the statement true? Not sure? Ask yourself, “is there any other way to please God? Keeping the law would have, but we couldn’t do it. Anything else? NO! Is there another way not to please God than being in the flesh? NO! 
Let’s take Axiom 1 and make the second statement false keeping the first true.
Conjecture 3: Man can please God if and only if Man is not in the flesh 
Can man please God in the flesh? Can God be pleased by man in the flesh? Hopefully your answers are no to both questions. So if one of the statements in the iff clause are false, while the other is true, then the conjecture is false.
Let’s summarize:
	Axiom 1 is true by virtue of Romans 8:8.
	Conjecture 1 is true by virtue of the definition of iff and since it is the contrapositive of Axiom 1.
	Conjecture 2 is true by virtue of the definition of iff and since it is the contrapositive of Axiom 1.
	Conjecture 3 is false by virtue of the definition of iff and Roman 8:8.
Based on our quasi-mathematical analysis the only way we can please God is if we are not in the flesh, and the only way god can be please is if we are not in the flesh. QED
Verse 9(a)
“You, however, are not in the flesh but in the Spirit, if in fact the Spirit of God dwells in you.”
How can we be in the Spirit? Let’s play a true/false game (I called it a game rather than a test, because some of you might get test anxiety)
	Reading the Bible puts me in the Spirit.
	Singing worship songs puts me in the Spirit.
	Going to church puts me in the Spirit
	Volunteering for children ministries puts me in the Spirit.
	Singing in a church musical group or choir puts me in the Spirit.
	The Spirit dwelling in me puts me in the Spirit.
Answer Key: (1) False; (2) False; (3) False; (4) False; (5) False; (6) True
I hope you are not surprised. The only way I can be in the Spirit, is if the Spirit dwells in me. That is, it is the Spirit that action (dwells in me) that cause me to be in the Spirit. I can do absolutely NOTHING to make that happen.
Verse 9(b)
“Anyone who does not have the Spirit of Christ does not belong to him.”
Wow, and I cannot do a thing to “have the Spirit”. But, I do not need to, for Christ has already done it, once and for all.
Verse 10
“But if Christ is in you, although the body is dead because of sin, the Spirit is life because of righteousness.”
I am walking around in a dead body. I feed a dead body. I exercise a dead body. I used to intoxicate my dead body and feed my dead body with other pleasures. Guess what I get (got) from all of that—a dead body. You might as well have bury me when I was 5 or 6 years old. You would not have to wait for me to die, my body was already dead. It was dead when I was born, not that I had committed a sin, but due to my sin nature (1 John 1: 5-10). But wait! There was always a hope. A hope that Christ would dwell in me. For if Christ dwells in me, if he takes up residence in this broken down shack, then the Spirit in my dead body has life, because of the righteousness of Christ.
It is easy to misread this in English, and come away with the impression that somehow I am righteous. I am not and I cannot be. Just as I can do nothing to be in the Spirit, there is nothing I can do to be righteous. But Christ in me is righteous, and it is counted unto me as righteousness.
Verse 11
“If the Spirit of him who raised Jesus from the dead dwells in you, he who raised Christ Jesus from the dead will also give life to your mortal bodies through his Spirit who dwells in you.”
And what can I do? I cannot put myself in the Spirit. I cannot coax the Spirit into me.  I cannot do anything with this dead body. I am simple dead, and lost, and headed toward eternal separation from God. Except, there is this tiny, measureable bit of hope that it is not about what I can or cannot do. Instead it is about what Christ does, past, present and future. If Christ indwells me with his Spirit, then as Christ was raised from the dead, then I have hope that I too will be raised with Him.
Verse 12
“So then, brothers, we are debtors, not to the flesh, to live according to the flesh. “
I owe my flesh nothing—it is dead. No matter what I try to do to pleasure my flesh, it will always be dissatisfied and empty. For it is impossible to stimulate that which is dead. I cannot drink enough alcohol, take enough drugs, sleep with enough women, and have enough money to satisfy my flesh. Dead flesh simply does not respond to any stimuli whatsoever! So I owe it no debt. Yet I am a debtor still.
Verse 13
“For if you live according to the flesh you will die, but if by the Spirit you put to death the deeds of the body, you will live.”
Feeding what I falsely perceive to the passions of the body leaves me in the same condition in which I started out: dead! Rather than spending a lifetime of effort and money on pleasing dead flesh, why not just kill the deeds and let them rest with the dead body, and this I can do by the Spirit that dwells in me. And that leads to life, and my hope: life eternal.
Verse 14
“For all who are led by the Spirit of God are sons of God.”
Wait, does that make Jesus my brother? “For whoever does the will of my Father in heaven is my brother and sister and mother.” (Matt. 12:50 ESV). Wow, Jesus is my bro! (If His Spirit dwells in me.)
Verse 15
“For you did not receive the spirit of slavery to fall back into fear, but you have received the Spirit of adoption as sons, by whom we cry, “Abba! Father!” “
Not only am I Jesus’ brother, His Father is my dear Father. That is a hope worthy persevering for, worth living for.
Verse 16 and 17
“The Spirit himself bears witness with our spirit that we are children of God, and if children, then heirs—heirs of God and fellow heirs with Christ, provided we suffer with him in order that we may also be glorified with him.”
Wait just a cotton-pick ‘in minute! Who said anything about suffering? That was not in my contract! And, Tim Allen failed to see the Santa Clause in his.
“Now in putting everything in subjection to him, he left nothing outside his control. At present, we do not yet see everything in subjection to him. But we see him who for a little while was made lower than the angels, namely Jesus, crowned with glory and honor because of the suffering of death, so that by the grace of God he might taste death for everyone. For it was fitting that he, for whom and by whom all things exist, in bringing many sons to glory, should make the founder of their salvation perfect through suffering. For he who sanctifies and those who are sanctified all have one source. That is why he is not ashamed to call them brothers, saying, “I will tell of your name to my brothers; in the midst of the congregation I will sing your praise.” And again, “I will put my trust in him.” And again, “Behold, I and the children God has given me.”
“Since therefore the children share in flesh and blood, he himself likewise partook of the same things, that through death he might destroy the one who has the power of death, that is, the devil, and deliver all those who through fear of death were subject to lifelong slavery. For surely it is not angels that he helps, but he helps the offspring of Abraham. Therefore he had to be made like his brothers in every respect, so that he might become a merciful and faithful high priest in the service of God, to make propitiation for the sins of the people. For because he himself has suffered when tempted, he is able to help those who are being tempted.” (Hebrews 2:8b-18)
Too bad that we cannot just pick one or two verses from the Bible and rest on them. No, not only is our destiny caught up in the entirety of Scripture, but our hop as well. You see, you have to read the whole story. You cannot skip the part where Frodo Baggins and Samwise Gamgee part company with the Fellowship and enter the land of Mordor alone. For that is what gave them the character to complete the mission. And, it is those tough things in scripture, like suffering, that build in use the endurance to finish the race.
Verse 18
“For I consider that the sufferings of this present time are not worth comparing with the glory that is to be revealed to us.”
Paul got the whole hope thing. He toiled fully knowing that it would bring suffering, which it did, but with the tiny bit of measurable hope of the glory that would be revealed to him. At that time, he just saw in a mirror dimly.
Verse 19
“For the creation waits with eager longing for the revealing of the sons of God.”
Not only did Paul have this hope, a hope that he could not physically see, but even all creation waits eagerly to see us, the sons (and daughter) of God revealed with Him. As the animals marched by Adam to receive their names, so they wait for man to be restored to the glory that was once his.
“It has been testified somewhere, “What is man, that you are mindful of him, or the son of man, that you care for him? You made him for a little while lower than the angels; you have crowned him with glory and honor, putting everything in subjection under his feet.” (Hebrews 2: 6-8a)
Verses 20 and 21
“For the creation was subjected to futility, not willingly, but because of him who subjected it, in hope that the creation itself will be set free from its bondage to corruption and obtain the freedom of the glory of the children of God.”
As man is restored to glory in which Adam was created, so the rest of Go’s creation will be set free from is bondage as well.
Verse 22 and 23
“For we know that the whole creation has been groaning together in the pains of childbirth until now. And not only the creation, but we ourselves, who have the firstfruits of the Spirit, groan inwardly as we wait eagerly for adoption as sons, the redemption of our bodies.”
Paul states this as a fact. The author of Hebrews elaborates on this, as we have seen. Many scholars believe that the author of Hebrews studied under or serve with Paul, and this is not surprising as Paul’s statement of fact is explained by the other. Again, a tiny but measurable fragment of hope, and not just for us, but for all of creation.
Verses 24 and 25
“For in this hope we were saved. Now hope that is seen is not hope. For who hopes for what he sees? But if we hope for what we do not see, with perseverance we wait eagerly for it.”
Now, this hope is beginning to be clear and starting to make sense. It is not just a hope of salvation, although this would be hope enough for me, it is a hope of restoration. It is a hope of returning to our family, the family of God, as sons and daughters, and with God as our dear Father. We cannot see it, touch, smell it, or taste it. But it is there all the same, perhaps tiny, but measureable. Al the saints who were slain over the years for this hope, did not see it, yet they did not doubt its reality, and died willingly for its fulfilment. Many have persevered for that which that could not see but knew was real, as real as the ground the trudges on, or the cross they hung on, of the stake upon which they were burnt.
 And so, we see in these verses that Romans 8 is about a great hope that we have as Christ followers. We went to his corner of the boxing rink for this reason. In fact, the way I read it, the rest of Romans 8 convinces us further of this hope, providing testimony and assuring us that it is worth persevering for.
Verses 26-27
“Likewise the Spirit helps us in our weakness. For we do not know what to pray for as we ought, but the Spirit himself intercedes for us with groanings too deep for words.  And he who searches hearts knows what is the mind of the Spirit, because the Spirit intercedes for the saints according to the will of God.”
Just as “the Spirit himself bears witness with our spirit that we are children of God, and if children, then heirs,” (Verse 16), so likewise does the same Spirit help us in our weakness to persevere as we wait upon the hope that we cannot see. An the Spirit that dwells in us knows our thought, needs, desires, and so on, better than we ourselves, and thus can intercede for us beyond what words can accomplish. 
Verse 28
“And we know that for those who love God all things work together for good, for those who are called according to his purpose.”
Sometimes we might think that as Christ followers, everything is our life will spell like roses. But the truth is, our lives always have an unpleasant odor and sometimes just stinks. When we chose to be Christ-followers, we chose to follow Him along the same path of suffering that He chose. We were never promised that our lives would be filled with goodness and blessings in this world. But God, knowing all, does have a plan for us. And in that plan, no matter what sufferings we may experience, God will cause them all to work together in such a way that the outcome is good. So we might suffer, or be sifted, or otherwise persecuted, but God uses all those to sanctify us, to develop our character. The end-result is good. God has some funny math:
suffering + illness + persecution+ ⋯ + the Spirit = Something Good
If we took God (the Spirit) out of this equation, we would get
suffering + illness + persecution+ ⋯ = Disaster*Emptiness
Verses 29 and 30
“For those whom he foreknew he also predestined to be conformed to the image of his Son, in order that he might be the firstborn among many brothers. And those whom he predestined he also called, and those whom he called he also justified, and those whom he justified he also glorified.”
We could dig a theological trench here, with some Christ-followers on one side and the rest on the other. Then we could spend from now until the beginning of eternity duking it out over predestination. But who is predestined? Is it not all the sons of glory?
“It has been testified somewhere, “What is man, that you are mindful of him, or the son of man, that you care for him? You made him for a little while lower than the angels; you have crowned him with glory and honor, putting everything in subjection under his feet.” (Hebrews 2: 6-8a)
Did he not foreknow us all in our mother’s womb? Does he not call all of us? Do all of us answer His calling? Do some of insist instead on satisfying dead flesh, futilely trying to bring life and pleasure to that which was dead from our beginning. Is predestination not something for the each individual man, but rather the race of man—the family of God, sons and daughters all. But like the prodigal son, some turned away from their inheritance for a little bit of pleasure that could not satisfy their dead flesh. But even then, there is a tiny bit of measurable hope, for the prodigal did return, and his father not only accepted him, but celebrated his return.
Verses 31-34
“What then shall we say to these things? If God is for us, who can be against us? He who did not spare his own Son but gave him up for us all, how will he not also with him graciously give us all things? Who shall bring any charge against God’s elect? It is God who justifies. Who is to condemn? Christ Jesus is the one who died—more than that, who was raised—who is at the right hand of God, who indeed is interceding for us.”
Who among you have not at least heard this part of verse 31? “If God is for us, who can be against us.” That really sums it up, but Paul did not stop there. He reminds us that God is so much for us that he sent his son to die for us and be reconciled unto his, Christ having paid the penalty for our sins. He wanted us in his corner so bad that He allowed his son to fall under one of Satan’s blows, only to rise again and defeat him once and for all. Death has no victory and it has lost its sting. God did that for us. For every man, women and child, all living in sin. He did it for the homosexual, the murderer, the rapist, the arsonist, the atheist and agnostic. Face it, we could be all of these at once, left to our own devices and dead, rotting flesh! And although Christ paid this great debt and gave us the tiny hope of restoration to the family of God, we still have to choose to accept the pardon, to give up on our useless flesh and earnestly desire His Sprit. On Christ, seated at the right-hand of the father is interceding continually for us, that we might turn toward His glory.
Verses 35-37
“Who shall separate us from the love of Christ? Shall tribulation, or distress, or persecution, or famine, or nakedness, or danger, or sword? As it is written, “For your sake we are being killed all the day long; we are regarded as sheep to be slaughtered.” No, in all these things we are more than conquerors through him who loved us.” 
Now, the God who did all that we have thus far discuss, who gave us a promise and a glimmer of hope that we might be restored, what shall separate us from Him? Paul uses all the things he has been through, tribulation, distress, persecution, hunger, nakedness, danger, the threat of sword, ship wreak and so on, to assure us that because he persevered, so too can we. An though we are being persecuted, mock, shamed, and killed all day, as if it was the modus operandi, we are still winning, fro we are in the corner of the new heavyweight champion of the Universe. We stand with its creators, who spoke the earth and all its inhabitants out of quantum foam with four simple words, “Let there be photons”. And with this Victor, we will be returned to the glory in which He created us.
Verse 38 and 39
“For I am sure that neither death nor life, nor angels nor rulers, nor things present nor things to come, nor powers, nor height nor depth, nor anything else in all creation, will be able to separate us from the love of God in Christ Jesus our Lord.”
But Paul could not stop there, for the Spirit wanted more revealed. And so Paul addresses the “power” of this tiny, measureable hope, more powerful than the photons that blasted life out of what was not alive, and substance out of that which was barely substance and its ant-substance, essentially nothing. Now Paul says that nothing can prevent tis hope from coming to pass, nothing in this world or apart from it.
Finally, this hope, this tiny but measureable hope of restoration, is something more than a feeling, more than a state of mind, more than an abstract idea. This hope is Christ himself.

Chapter 11 Summary
Satan was the boxing heavyweight champion of the world
Jesus, and apparent underdog, knocked Satan out in the fight of all time
In doing so, Christ defeat sin and death and gave us access to life and His love
This is our quantum hope, though not fully seen, and we wait patiently for it
It is not wishful thinking; rather it is measureable
Paul believed that nothing would interfere with our quantum hope, that nothing would “be able to separate us from the love of God in Christ Jesus our Lord”.

 
 
1 Corinthian 13: The Story of Love
Though love appears to be the main attraction of of Paul’s first epistle to the church at Corinth, we shall see that faith and hope are co-stars on this stage. Of “Faith”, I have written at length in the prequel, Quantum Phaith. Now we turn our attention to hope. Yet, understand this, the fabric of faith, hope and love are so tightly woven, that it is difficult to discern where one ends and the other begins.
Once again, we find Paul writing about a great theological truth. He has been writing in Chapter 12 of Romans about Spiritual gifts, to keep the church at Corinth informed. Having written his peace regarding gifts, he leaves them with an epilog, which he sums up saying:
“So now faith, hope, and love abide, these three; but the greatest of these is love.” (ESB)
—1st Corinthians 13:13
Of course, since this is a treatise of hope, we shall see what nuggets we can find in Paul’s writing. The sequel to Quantum Hope is Quantum Love, so we will not dwell too much on the “secrets” of love here. But due to the interwoven nature of these three attributes, we cannot divorce ourselves form such a discussion.
Commentary on 1st Corinthians 13:1-13
Verses 1 through 3
1 If I speak in the tongues of men or of angels, but do not have love, I am only a resounding gong or a clanging cymbal. 2 And if I have prophetic powers, and understand all mysteries and all knowledge, and if I have all faith, so as to remove mountains, but have not love, I am nothing. 3 If I give away all I have, and if I deliver up my body to be burned, but have not love, I gain nothing. 
I 1st Corinthians 13, Paul pauses from speaking of spiritual gift to place them in their proper context, many in Corinth in the 1st Century, like many in Colorado Springs and Atlanta, claim various spiritual gifts. Yet of these many may be falsely claim if love is not manifested by the claimant. Paul emphasize the centrality of Christ-like love, agapē (ἀγάπην). He says that if we do not manifest the love of Christ, then any spiritual gift we have of claim is worthless or ineffective.
Verses 4 through 8(a)
4 Love is patient and kind; love does not envy or boast; it is not arrogant 5 or rude. It does not insist on its own way; it is not irritable or resentful; 6 it does not rejoice at wrongdoing, but rejoices with the truth. 7 Love bears all things, believes all things, hopes all things, endures all things. 8 Love never ends. 
Here Paul launches into his well-known description of Christ-like love or charity. In essence Paul is say that agapē is a selfless love that focuses outwardly toward the object of love, not expecting anything in return. Imagine if we loved like that. Ponder upon this fact. We are loved like that, by our Savior ad our Father in heaven, who sent His son because of that Love. John says that God is love (1 John 4:8). 
We will not dwell on love to much here, as that will be the focus of Quantum Love, but suffice it to say that this love is worth giving and hoping to receive in its full glory when Christ reveals himself again. This is our quantum hope:
“So we have come to know and to believe the love that God has for us. God is love, and whoever abides in love abides in God, and God abides in him. By this is love perfected with us, so that we may have confidence for the day of judgment, because as he is so also are we in this world.”
—1 John 4:16-17 (ESV)
Verses 8(b) through 11
8 As for prophecies, they will pass away; as for tongues, they will cease; as for knowledge, it will pass away. 9 For we know in part and we prophesy in part, 10 but when the perfect comes, the partial will pass away. 11 When I was a child, I spoke like a child, I thought like a child, I reasoned like a child. When I became a man, I gave up childish ways. 
Paul speaks here of the temporal limitations of time. Nothing we now know will last. That is nothing except love. Faith will give us hope, and hope will focus us on love and heaven, but when love is completely reveal, there will be no need for faith and hope any longer. 
Verse 12
12 For now we see in a mirror dimly, but then face to face. Now I know in part; then I shall know fully, even as I have been fully known. 
Paul speaks further of our partial view or encounter with the love of Christ. It is not that Christ has not given his love, it is a matter of our inability to fully embrace it. Thus quantum hope is essentially a requirement, a necessity for anticipating loves complete manifestation. Without the hope of that manifestation, life can be futile. Many of us would not hold onto love without the hope of its completion.
Verse 13
13 So now faith, hope, and love abide, these three; but the greatest of these is love. (ESB)
Setting aside all spiritual gifts, Paul emphasizes that what we really need are faith hope and love. Faith is the assurance of the things we hope for (Hebrew 11:1), and we hope for the love that we do not fully see, and wait patiently for it (Romans 8:25).
If the world at large—the destitute, those in despair, those in bondage, those with additions, those who cannot find meaning for their lives—a world that is full of false hope, if they had quantum faith leading to quantum hope, they could find true inner peace in the love of Christ, though not yet fully manifested. Many are searching for hope in the wrong place and for things that do not matter or satisfy. Victor Marx found it. Birdee Pruitt, though fictional, did not.
Hope Floats
“Beginnings are scary, endings are usually sad, but it's what's in the middle that counts.  So when you find yourself at the beginning, just give hope a chance to float up. And it will.”
— Birdee Pruitt  
Hope Floats is a 1998 American romantic drama film directed by Forest Whitaker and starring Sandra Bullock, Harry Connick, Jr., and Gena Rowlands.
Birdee Pruitt (Sandra Bullock) is a Chicago housewife who is invited onto a talk show under the pretense of getting a free makeover but instead is ambushed with the revelation that her husband Bill has been having an affair with her best friend Connie. Humiliated on national television, Birdee and her daughter Bernice (Mae Whitman) move back to Birdee’s hometown of Smithville, Texas, with Birdee’s eccentric mother Ramona (Gena Rowlands) to make a fresh start. As Birdee and Bernice leave Chicago, Birdee gives Bernice a letter from her father, telling Bernice how much he misses her.
Birdee struggles to make a new life as a working single mother and deals with the growing attraction between herself and a former high school classmate, Justin Matisse (Harry Connick, Jr.). She also tries to rebuild her relationship with her estranged mother, her ailing father (who suffers from Alzheimer’s Disease), and her daughter, who wants desperately to be with her father and blames her mother for the breakup, even trying to sabotage the romantic overtures Justin makes towards Birdee.
Adding to Birdee’s heartache is her former status as the school queen bee and a beauty pageant winner, which alienated many of her former classmates. They also haven't forgotten Birdee’s high school snobbery and rub her nose in her televised embarrassment.
Ramona tries to mend the gap between her daughter and granddaughter by telling a childhood story of her own. She asks Bernice what she’s wishing for her birthday. Bernice secretly wishes for her father to return.
That night, drinking a cup of tea before she could sleep, Ramona suffers a massive heart attack and dies. At the funeral, Bill arrives at the church. Bernice believes her father’s presence is a sign her wish has come true...that her father wants them both to come home. However, it soon becomes clear to her that her parents’ split is permanent when Bill asks Birdee for a divorce. 
Birdee Pruitt: I would have stayed with you forever. I would have turned myself inside out for you. 
Bill Pruitt: Birdee, I wouldn't have let you! People grow. They change. They have to! 
Birdee Pruitt: You think that I don't know that? I know that I'm not what I once was. I know that! But I haven't changed so much, that I would go and lie to someone that I love. God, I would walk through fire before I'd let them feel like they were nothing! And I would never break up anybody's home. Because I am not a quitter. I care about my family! I may not be the same person, but then again, neither are you. You're sad, you're weak, and you're... shorter. If you want to know the truth. 
Bill Pruitt: I'm in love with Connie. And this is my chance for a fresh start, and I'm taking it, I'm sorry! 
Birdee Pruitt: Then you should take it. If that's how you feel then you should take it. You and Connie deserve each other. You were lucky to have me. But you know what? I think I already got the best part of you. And she's standing right out there, and she's waiting for me. I don't know... what's left just doesn't look so good anymore. So why'd you come back? You want my permission? You want my... condolences? Why did you come back?
Bernice, wanting to be with her father, is devastated when he tells her that even though he loves her, he has no room for her in his new life with Connie. Crushed at the thought that her father put another woman before her, Bernice breaks down sobbing, screaming for him to come back and take her with him. Bill turns his back on her and drives off, leaving her to be comforted by her mother. As Birdee comforts Bernice up in her room, Bernice learns the letter was actually written by Birdee, and not really by her father. Sitting on Bernice’s bed, Birdee tells her:
“You know, I always thought I was gonna be, I don’t know, special. But I’m not. I’m just... I’m just an ordinary person. And that's OK. Because... you make me special. Don’t you know that? Don’t you know that you’re everything in this world to me? And we're gonna make it through this because we are a team. Birdee and Bernice, the coolest chicks in Smithville. So don't you ever think about leaving me again... because I need you. I love you.”
Bernice ultimately accepts Bill’s departure from her life as a full-time parent and begins to accept Justin as her mother’s new love interest and a father figure. Mother and daughter share a tender yet humorous moment when Bernice asks Birdee if she’s going to marry Justin. When Birdee asks her if she doesn’t like Justin, Bernice says her only real concern is being known as “Bernice Matisse”. 
 
Birdee Calvert-Pruitt is back in her hometown of Smithville, Texas, after discovering that her husband is having an affair with her best friend, Connie. The entire town knows what happened to flawless beauty Birdee, since Connie let her know about the affair on a national talk show. Back in town, she's dealing with catty old friends and acquaintances from high school who can't help rubbing it in her face that she isn’t as perfect as she thought while still trying to get back on her feet with her daughter, Bernice. Deeply depressed, she runs into an old friend, Justin Matisse, who tries to help her through, but is still in love with her. Birdee must make a new life for her and her daughter, but struggles with whether or not Justin be able to be part of it.
So when Birdee said, “So when you find yourself at the beginning, just give hope a chance to float up. And it will.” I am certain she was not talking about quantum hope, but give it a chance to float up and it will, for sure.
 
Chapter 12 Summary
1 Corinthians 13 is primarily about the Love of Christ
All spiritual gifts are worthless in the absence of love
Faith and hope are also important, but love is greater
There is a pattern in Scripture of a relationship between faith, hope and love 
 
Quantum Trio: Faith, Hope and Love
“So now faith, hope, and love abide, these three; but the greatest of these is love.”
—1 Corinthians 13:13
Was Paul a Quantum Physicist?
I like to think that if Paul had been among the quantum physicist, he would have written, “So now quantum faith, quantum hope, and quantum love abide, these three; but the greatest of these is quantum love.”
All are measureable, an Paul saw (and the other Apostles more directly) the measure of this great love. John watched as love manifested itself on the cross; that was measurable. The Samaritan woman saw it manifest at the well; that was measureable. Lazarus saw it manifested from the tomb; that was measureable.
When Christ ascended into heaven to sit at the right-hand of the Father, he sent us the Spirit to comfort us, to dwell in us. And though we see love manifested, we do not see it fully. We do see love at the cross, the well or the tomb. We read about it, hear about it and see glimpses of it only. But our quantum faith assures us of our quantum hope, which allows to wait patiently for love’s complete revelation.
Quantum faith—faith that is perhaps the size of a mustard seed, yet measureable—and quantum hope—also measureable—are just means to an end. And that end, quantum love, is also a beginning. It is the beginning of eternity. I think that even if I were not sure of the inerrancy of Scripture, the truth about the love of God, I would want to have that hope for fear of missing out on that which we wait patiently for.
I will take hope in that promise over worldly fame, riches and power (and over a red Mustang convertible) any day of the week and twice on Sundays. Paul had found quantum hope out of the despair of false religion, on a dusty road. Victor found quantum hope out of despair in both a literal and figurative garbage can. Everyone needs it though many do not know it. The Jamaican bobsled team needs it; Middle Earth needs it; Wayne Szalinski needs it; and Birdee Pruitt needs it. I need it! 
“So now quantum faith, quantum hope, and quantum love abide, these three; but the greatest of these is quantum love.”
—Paul the Apostle and Quantum Physicist
A Life in Need of Quantum Hope
In Quantum Phaith, I shares a little of my own faith journey, yet I did not bare my sole too much. But the truth is, I am in need of quantum hope as much as anyone. I have been married to the same woman for 33 years, have two beautiful teenage girls, I have a Doctorate in Mathematics and I am employed. God has gifted me with the ability to write, and I have published 20 books (this will be 21) and written 340 blogs to date. So how could Jeff need quantum hope? He wrote this and it appears that he gets it.
However, there were times over the years were marriage was a rocky road and there was something different about Jeff that we could not put a finger on. At age 50, I experienced a pulmonary embolism (PE) resulting from a deep vein thrombosis (DVT) or blood clot. I experienced a second PE at age 51. Afterward I went into a deep depression and withdrew from just about everyone. I am now 56, and about two years ago was diagnosed with Asperger’s Syndrome. That explained a lot about me and my early life. Asperger’s is in the autistic spectrum.
Asperger’s Syndrome
Asperger’s syndrome, also called Asperger’s disorder, is a type of pervasive developmental disorder (PDD). PDDs are a group of conditions that involve delays in the development of many basic skills, most notably the ability to socialize with others, to communicate, and to use imagination.
Although Asperger’s syndrome is similar in some ways to autism—another, more severe type of PDD—there are some important differences. Children with Asperger’s syndrome typically function better than do those with autism. In addition, children with Asperger’s syndrome generally have normal intelligence and near-normal language development, although they may develop problems communicating as they get older.
Asperger’s syndrome was named for the Austrian doctor, Hans Asperger, who first described the disorder in 1944. However, Asperger’s syndrome was not recognized as a unique disorder until much later.
Characteristics of Asperger Syndrome
Each person is different. An individual might have all or only some of the described behaviors to have a diagnosis of AS. These behaviors include the following [76]:
	Marked impairment in the use of multiple nonverbal behaviors such as: eye gaze, facial expression, body posture, and gestures to regulate social interaction.
	Extreme difficulty in developing age-appropriate peer relationships. (e.g., AS children may be more comfortable with adults than with other children).
	Inflexible adherence to routines and perseveration.
	Fascination with maps, globes, and routes.
	Average or above average intelligence
	Superior rote memory.
	Preoccupation with a particular subject to the exclusion of all others. Amasses many related facts.
	Difficulty judging personal space, motor clumsiness.
	Sensitivity to the environment, loud noises, clothing and food textures, and odors.
	Speech and language skills impaired in the area of semantics, pragmatics, and prosody (volume, intonation, inflection, and rhythm).
	Difficulty understanding others’ feelings.
	Pedantic, formal style of speaking; often called “little professor,” verbose.
	Extreme difficulty reading and/or interpreting social cues.
	Socially and emotionally inappropriate responses.
	Literal interpretation of language; difficulty comprehending implied meanings.
	Extensive vocabulary. Reading commences at an early age (hyperlexia).
	Stereotyped or repetitive motor mannerisms.
	Difficulty with “give and take” of conversation.
I Needed Quantum Hope
Jeff grew up needing quantum hope, but unlike many he did not know he was different. Consequently, he did not know why he needed quantum hope or that he needed it. I am sure that sounds weird, but I struggled with “finding myself”, even after becoming a Christ follower. I was helping other find out who they were in Christ, but I could not find myself. I suffered from severe self-esteem problems (and self-esteem is not biblical) and was extremely sensitive to criticism of any sort.
I started writing Quantum Hope almost immediately after Quantum Phaith was published, but I got stuck. I did not have writers block, because I was writing other stuff like crazy. I could have easily started Quantum Love, but that would have been out of order. To make a long story short, I could not grasp quantum hope. I didn’t get it. It was a missing link. I thought that since I was already a Christ follower, hope was not something I needed. I was wrong! But God in his perfect timing eventually let me in on it, or at least as much as He cared to. And so it is written. And all along, like Birdee and Victor, hope is what I needed. Like for King and County sings, “hope is what I crave.”
