Preface
Obviously, either I do not know how to spell “faith,” or I am making a play on words—like physics.  Since this book is about faith and physics, I just simply joined the words: physics + faith = phaith.  The content of the book will explain why I am joining two seemingly disparate concepts, the physical and the spiritual.
If you read the Foreword, you might think I am rather blunt.  I should note here that what follows is entirely my opinion.  It does not represent the view of a Southern Baptist church, were I might be considered heretic, and not churches like Pulpit Rock, where I might be considered a traditionalist.  It does however represent many years of careful study of the mathematical nature of physics and of God’s Word.
I am not a graduate of seminary, not a pastor, or a teacher of religion.  I am a simple (really simple) mathematician.  I went to college at Mercer University in Macon, GA, where I studied Biology and Christianity.  I studied mathematics at the Colorado School of mines for my Masters education, and received my Ph.D. in mathematics at the University of Northern Colorado.  I studied New Testament Greek for a year at Fuller, and taught mathematics, statistics, and operations research at a variety of institutions.
I once had the great privilege of teaching an experimental multivariable calculus and physics course at the United States Military Academy to cadets whom I felt were smarter than I was.  In total, I taught there for six years, and one of the greatest ‘take-aways’ was that some of the nation’s finest young soon-to-be officers are men of great faith—actually of quantum phaith—who allow Christ to work through them for greatness.
I am now working in the defense industry using mathematics to model missiles, satellites, threats, and so on, and implementing the models in simulations of components, systems, and system of systems.  I have written a few, more technical books, but this one demands a larger readership.
My own faith does not come from books.  In fact, I have heard it said that belief is what someone else teaches you, while faith is something you learn for yourself.  I spent about five years commanding cavalry troops from the platoon to company level during the cold war, and I learned much of my faith while engaged in some very trying experiences on the former Czech border.  I also learned much about faith going through two graduate programs in mathematics, which I was ill prepared for.  My wife, Laurie is also responsible for contributing to my faith education (in a positive way, of course).  Together, we have been through the births of our children, death of siblings and parents, deaths of soldiers we commanded, divorces of friends we love, and many other life tragedies.  I have had two near death experiences with pulmonary embolisms, so life has a different meaning for me, and death is not something of which I am afraid. 
This book is about what I have discovered about faith, and how my interpretation of mathematics and physics has emerged from that faith.  It is what I am now calling “quantum phaith.”
The emphasis here is how faith made math and physics make sense, not the other way around.  Hence, my a priori is faith in the Lord Jesus Christ.  So not only do I write with presuppositions—imposed by life and careful study—but under the influence of the Living Savior.  Though the way I earn my living depends greatly upon mathematics and physics—I use them every day—they are not first principles, as we will see later.
Big Bang Theorist, evolutionist, and some creationist will not be happy with the content of this book—it may not be for you.  On the other hand, opponents and proponents may find it entertaining.  It is technical to some extent, but not too technical.  I have not used mathematical formulae or formal theorems—except to restate some well-known ones—and Jeff Goldblum (Jurassic Park), Jessica Rabbit (Who Framed Roger Rabbit), and Julia Roberts (Conspiracy Theory) all have parts in the story.  Other role players include George Cantor, Isaac Newton, Albert Einstein, Kurt Gödel, and Karl Heisenberg.  The Koch Snowflake, the Mandelbrot Set, Chaos Theory, Quantum Particles, and Number Theory liven up the action.  Though it may not seem, the book is about faith!
We will examine inductive reasoning and inductive Bible study.  We will look at the Seven Weeks of Daniel, the Four Horsemen, I meant Equestrians of Revelation, the Beginning, and more.  I will lay out a Biblical Model and quantum particle model—the Standard Model—and will draw analogies of spiritual things with physical things.
I hope that you will not find this too technical (my grammar checker says it is at a tenth grade reading level).  The most complex math is the Frank Equation (cabbages + some stuff = Frank) in Chapter 4.  We will discuss quantum particles, such as quarks and lepton, but I explain these as clearly as possible in the text with words and pictures, or in footnotes.  I cannot pronounce words with more than two syllables, so I have reduced technical terms to the minimum and defined.  The most difficult part may be the Greek and Hebrew, but the words are spelled out in their English phonics, for example, φωνηω = phoneo—meaning call, from which we get the English word phone.
Mainly, this book is about faith, based on Scripture—Old and New Testaments—and experience.  In speaking of the Old and New Testament, someone has stated,
The New is in the Old concealed
The Old is in the New revealed
The New is in the Old contained
The Old is in the New explained 


Jeffrey S. Strickland
President
Simulation Educators
Colorado Springs, CO, “where God spends most of His time”
 
Other Books by the Author
Albert Einstein: “Nobody expected me to lay golden eggs”.  Copyright © by 2011 Jeffrey S. Strickland.  Lulu.com. ISBN 978-1-257-86014-2
Using Math to Defeat the Enemy: Combat Modeling for Simulation.  Copyright © by 2011 Jeffrey S. Strickland.  Lulu.com. ISBN 978-1-257-83225-5
The Men of Manhattan: Creators of the Nuclear Era.  Copyright © by 2011 Jeffrey S. Strickland.  Lulu.com. ISBN 978-1-257-76188-3
Fundamentals of Combat Modeling.  Copyright © by 2010 Jeffrey S. Strickland.  Lulu.com. ISBN 978-1-257-00583-3
Mathematical Modeling of Warfare and Combat Phenomenon.  Copyright © by 2011 Jeffrey S. Strickland.  Lulu.com. ISBN 978-1-4583-9255-8
Systems Engineering Processes and Practice.  Copyright © by 2010 Jeffrey S. Strickland.  Lulu.com. ISBN 978-1-257-09273-4
Missile Flight Simulation - Surface-to-Air Missiles.  Copyright © by 2010 Jeffrey S. Strickland.  Lulu.com. ISBN 978-0-557-88553-4
Discrete Event Simulation using ExtendSim 8.  Copyright © by 2010 Jeffrey S. Strickland.  Lulu.com. ISBN 978-0-557-72821-3
 
Quantum Phaith for Beginners
- Gaining Perspective -
"Everyone else would climb a peak by looking for a path somewhere in the mountain.  [John] Nash would climb another mountain altogether and from that distant peak would shine a searchlight back onto the first peak." 
-Donald Newman (A Beautiful Mind by S. Nasar, p. 12)
Introduction
I have struggled with what should come first, a discussion of biblical faith or a discussion of quantum physics (or quantum mechanics).  In the end, I had to consider what came from what.  Many scientists would claim that their faith—if they have any at all—evolved from their study of the science.  For me it was Biblical faith that revealed the mysteries of mathematics and physics.
There is a verse in Scripture that many know or have heard (even people who have never picked up a Bible).  The New American Standard translation of Luke 17:6 says:
And the Lord said, “If you had faith like a mustard seed, you would say to this mulberry tree, ‘Be uprooted and be planted in the sea’; and it would obey you”. [1] (NASB)
I have to admit that my faith is much smaller than mustard seed, which by the way is very tiny.  I have always used, not by choice, sweat, blood, and a shovel to move trees (or at least very small trees).  Although I have never held a mustard seed, there in an abundance of information about them is available through the internet.  I suppose Jesus had first-hand experience when he spoke about a mustard seed—I have no reason to doubt otherwise.
Κόκκος σίναπι (What would we do without mustard seeds?)
The Greek renders Jesus’ reference to a mustard seed as κόκκον σινάπεως, transliterated as kosson sinapeōs.  The word Κόκκος, kokkos, is translated five times as ‘grain’ and once as ‘corn’ in the King James Version (KJV).  The word σίναπι, sinapi, occurs five times in the KJV and is translated as ‘mustard seed’ in all five instances.  Strong’s Lexicon says that mustard is “the name of a plant which in oriental countries grows from a very small seed and attains a height of a tree, 10 feet (3 m) and more; hence a very small quantity of a thing is likened to a mustard seed, and also a thing which grows to a remarkable size.” [2]
The Latin Vulgate renders the verse as:
dixit autem Dominus si haberetis fidem sicut granum sinapis diceretis huic arbori moro eradicare et transplantare in mare et oboediret vobis
I mention the Latin here since it is from the Latin word quanta that we derive the English word quantity.  I also want to make it clear that the Latin did not render the Greek work for grain as quantum, rather as granum.  However, Matthew 13:32 describes the mustard seed as “quod minimum quidem est omnibus seminibus”, that is, “the least indeed of all seeds”.  Although I lack direct historical literary evidence that Jesus had in mind the concept of a small quantity when he speaks of a mustard seed, in this case, the context of His words speaks of a “small quantity of a thing”.
Later, we will explore the concept or meaning of biblical faith, but first let’s digress and explore the concept of small quantities of things.
Phundamentals of Physical Quantities
If you are close to my age (52), then you probably remember the television series Quantum Leap.  If you are younger, you may have heard terms like quantum computing or quantum numbers.  At any rate, you have probably heard the word quantum, whether you paid any attention to it or not.
In physics, a quantum (plural: quanta) is the minimum amount of any physical entity involved in an interaction.  Behind this, one finds the fundamental notion that a physical property may be ‘quantized’, referred to as ‘the hypothesis of quantization’ [3].  This means that the magnitude can take on only certain discrete values, leading to the related term called “quantum number”.  An example of a quantized entity is the energy transfer of elementary particles of matter (called fermions) and of photons, and other bosons. [4]
A photon is a single quantum of light, and is referred to as a light quantum.  The energy of an electron, bound to an atom (at rest), is said to be quantized, which results in the stability of atoms, and of matter in general.
As incorporated into the theory of quantum mechanics, physicists regard this as part of the fundamental framework for understanding and describing nature at the infinitesimal level.
Normally quanta are considered discrete packets with energy stored in them. Max Planck (pictured right in 1918, the year he won the Nobel Prize for his work in quantum theory) considered these quanta to be particles that can change their form (meaning that they can be absorbed and released).  This phenomenon can be observed in the case of blackbody radiation, when it is being heated and cooled.
Phundamentals of Phaith
Now faith is the assurance of things hoped for, the conviction [evidence] of things not seen. [1]
- Hebrews 11:1 (NASB, brackets added)
Seeing isn’t believing; believing is seeing. 
- The Santa Claus
I have seen the Grand Canyon, walked around the rim, taken photos, and bought something from the myriad of gift shops.  It does not take much conviction to assume it is real.  Ditto with the Statue of Liberty, Monument Valley, the Saturn V rocket, Disney World, and so on.  I did not witness the atomic explosion at Hiroshima (I was not born), the gunfight at the O.K. Corral, the third Crusade, the sack of Jerusalem, or the birth of Christ.  However, I have seen historical evidence that all these events occurred, and I do not need conviction to believe they did.
I have not seen (direct) evidence of the eternal life that Christ promised to believers.  I’ve heard about it, read about it, watched movies about it, but I have not seen it.  I have had parents and in-laws die.  They had known Christ in a personal relationship, but I did not see them ascend to heaven.  In fact, the last time I saw them was in an urn or in the ground.  Yet, I am convicted that they are living eternity with Christ—it is something I have hoped for them and for myself someday.  I am assured of this by faith.  I stated at the outset (in the preface) that belief is something we get from others, while faith is something we develop for ourselves.  That is not entirely accurate.  “So faith comes by hearing, and hearing by the word of Christ.” [1] (Romans 10:17, NASB) 
So, ‘seeing’ is not involved in developing faith.  Rather, it is directly linked to ‘hearing’ the Word of God.  Now, I submit to you that the most intellectual people in the world might read the Word of God, and never be moved by it, while a child might hear it—read it with the Spirit speaking to their soul—and have faith.
I am not quite sure I agree precisely with the elf in The Santa Claus, but too often, we look for evidence before we believe.  For me, I had to believe before I could see the evidence.  It was there right before me for years.  I read it, I studied it, and I dissected it.  Nevertheless, not until that ‘quantum leap’ of faith came about did I see it.  And quantum leap it was—just a tiny little bit, like a mustard seed.  I did not have an encounter with death.  I did not have any traumatic experience that drove me to faith.  In some sense, I just stopped trying to understand on my own.  You might call it a Holy Spirit encounter, but I don’t even remember feeling it.  One moment it was not there, the next moment it was.  I had merely said, “Lord, I give up.  I can’t do it on my own.”  Voilà, faith arrived.  Later we will visit Principle 10c: “Truth can only be noticed when the private perspective is doubted”.  There was just too much of me in the way of my understanding.  I was looking for conviction in something I could see (the words), but missing the Word that was trying to assure me.
As I recently heard:
“Intimacy with God determines your clarity from God.”
- Pastor Daniel Rolfe 
2 Corinthians 4:1-6 says:
 1 Therefore, since through God’s mercy we have this ministry, we do not lose heart.  2 Rather, we have renounced secret and shameful ways; we do not use deception, nor do we distort the word of God.  On the contrary, by setting forth the truth plainly we commend ourselves to everyone’s conscience in the sight of God.  3 And even if our gospel is veiled, it is veiled to those who are perishing.  4 The god of this age has blinded the minds of unbelievers, so that they cannot see the light of the gospel that displays the glory of Christ, who is the image of God.  5 For what we preach is not ourselves, but Jesus Christ as Lord, and ourselves as your servants for Jesus’ sake.  6 For God, who said, “Let light shine out of darkness,” made his light shine in our hearts to give us the light of the knowledge of God’s glory displayed in the face of Christ. [5] (NIV)
Well now, if God’s Word—Christ—is not believable to you, then you have no hope in understanding it, no matter how educated you have become.  If His word is not clear to you, then perhaps you are not intimate enough with Him! 
And that’s all I have to say about that (for now)…
 
Quantum Mechanics for Beginners
- A Very Small Matter -

For now we  see in a mirror dimly, but then  face to face; now I know in part, but then I will know fully just as I also have been fully known. [1] 
- 1 Corinthians 13:12 (NASB)
"I want to know how God created this world.  I am not interested in this or that phenomenon, in the spectrum of this or that element; I want to know His thoughts; the rest are details."
 - Albert Einstein
Uncovering Blind Spots
Science is exciting because it is always in trouble.  No matter how excellent a theory is, it always misses some point or other.  Even our most precious ideas about the universe are not able to explain everything; there is always a blind spot.  When the hopeful folks zoom in on that blind spot it nearly always turns out to be a lot larger than anybody thought, and all of us are a mere bunch of naive beginners.
There is a book entitled The Blind Side that tells about the evolution of the Offensive Tackle’s key role in the National Football League (NFL), through the story of a young man named Michael Oher (pictured here [6]) who started playing football at the Briarcrest Christian School.  Another football player, named Lawrence Julius Taylor, played his entire professional career as a linebacker for the New York Giants in the NFL.  
The Giants headed into the 1985 season with a sense of optimism, after their successful 1984 campaign and a 5–0 pre-season record.  The Giants went 10–6, and Taylor spearheaded a defense that led the NFL in sacks with 68. [7] Taylor had 13 sacks.  One of the more memorable plays of his career occurred during this season.  On a Monday Night Football game against the Redskins, Taylor's sack of Redskins quarterback Joe Theismann inadvertently resulted in a compound fracture of Theismann's right leg.  Taylor had approached Theismann on his blind side, and was not picked up by the left tackle.  At the time, the quarterback was one of the highest paid athletes in American football.  Taylor changed this!  Suddenly, the left tackle position was very critical to a successful quarterback.  Michael Oher would be highly recruited to protect the quarterback’s blind side, at the left tackle position.  Quarterbacks now required something external to their own senses and athletic ability—they needed a left tackle to cover their blind spot!
At the end of the eighteenth century, the blind spot of regular mechanics (the library of dogmas that teach the ins and outs of objects moving and colliding) was the behavior of very small objects, such as electrons, and the behavior that light caused when it hit small things like electrons.
Light had been a mystery for centuries.  Some experiments proved beyond the shadow of a doubt that light were waves.  Some other experiments proved beyond the shadow of a doubt that light were particles.  The truth about light was obviously hidden and it was not until 1900 that people began to understand that there was something very weird about the world of the small.  It was something that required a complete revision of understanding.
It was decided that the world of the very small was governed by rules that were different from the rules that governed the world we can see, and regular (or classical) mechanics begat Quantum Mechanics.  And that unanticipated breach in mechanics spawned this very important principle:
Principle (1):
Individual quantum particles are subjected to a completely different law than the law to which large objects made from quantum particles are subjected.
The introduction of the quantum
The Quantum Mechanical era commenced in 1900, when Max Planck postulated that everything is made up of little particles he called quanta (one quantum; two quanta).  Matter had its quanta but also the forces that kept material objects together.  Forces could only come in little steps at the time; there was no more such thing as ‘infinitely small’.
Albert Einstein  (pictured here [6]) took matters further when he successfully described how light interacts with electrons, but it wasn't until the 1920's that things began to fall together, and some fundamental rules about the world of the small where wrought almost by pure thought.  The men who mined these rules were the arch beginners of Quantum Mechanics, the ‘Breakfast Club’ of the modern era.  Names like Pauli, Heisenberg, Schrödinger, Born, Rutherford and Bohr still put butterflies in the bellies of those of us who know what incredible work these ‘boys’ achieved—as most of them where in their twenties; they were rebels, most of them not even taken serious.  They were Europeans, struck by the depression, huddled together in tiny attics peeking into a strange new world as once the twelve spies checked out the Promised Land.  Let all due kudos abound.
Believing the unbelievable
One of the toughest obstacles the early Quantum Mechanic explorers had to overcome was their own beliefs in determinism.  Because the world of the small is so different, people had to reformat the system of logic that had brought them thus far.  In order to understand nature they had to let go of their intuition and embrace a completely new way of thinking.  The things they discovered where fundamental rules that just were, and could not really be explained in terms of the large-scale world.  Just like water is wet and fire is hot, quantum particles display behaviors that are inherent to them alone and cannot be compared with any material object we can observe with the naked eye.
One of those fundamental rules is that everything is made up from little bits.  Material objects are made up of particles, but also the forces that keep those objects together.  Light, for instance, is besides that bright stuff which makes things visible, also a force (the so-called electromagnetic force) that keeps electrons tied to the nuclei of atoms, and atoms tied together to make molecules and finally objects.  Scripture often refers to Jesus as light, and most exegetes focus on the metaphorical value of these statements.  However, as we realize that all forms of matter are in fact ‘solidified’ light (energy, as in E=mc^2) and the electromagnetic force holds all atoms together, the literal value of Paul's statement "and He is before all things, and in Him all things hold together (Col 1:17)" becomes quite compelling.
Either, particles are so-called real particles, also known as fermions, or they are force particles, also known as bosons.  Gluons, which are bosons, bind together by quarks, which are fermions.  Quarks and gluons form nucleons, and nucleons bound together by gluons form the nuclei of atoms.
The electron, which is a fermion, is bound to the nucleus by photons, which are bosons.  The whole shebang together forms atoms.  Atoms form molecules.  Molecules form objects.
Everything that we can see, from the most distant stars to the girl next door, or this page you are staring at and yourself as well are made up from a mere 3 fermions and 9 bosons.  The three fermions are up-quark, down-quark and the electron.  The nine bosons are eight gluons and one photon.  Like so:
 
Nevertheless, the three fermions that make up our entire universe are not all there is.  These three are the survivors of a large family of elementary particles, and we now know this family as the Standard Model.  What happened to the rest?  Will they ever be revived?
 
We will take a look at what quantum particles are and in which weird world they live.
 
History of particle physics 
The idea that matter is composed of elementary particles dates to at least the 6th century BC.  The ancient Greek philosophers Leucippus, Democritus, and Epicurus studied the philosophical doctrine of ‘atomism’.  Although in the 17th century Isaac Newton thought tiny particles made up all matter, John Dalton formally stated, in 1802, that tiny atoms made up everything. 
Dmitri Mendeleev's first periodic table, in 1869, helped cement the view, prevalent throughout the 19th century, that matter was made of atoms.  Work by J. J. Thomson established that atoms are composed of light electrons and massive protons.  Ernest Rutherford established that the protons are concentrated in a compact nucleus.  The nucleus was initially thought to be composed of protons and confined electrons (in order to explain the difference between nuclear charge and mass number), but was later found to be composed of protons and neutrons. 
The 20th century explorations of nuclear physics and quantum physics, culminating with proofs of nuclear fission and nuclear fusion, gave rise to an active industry of generating one atom from another, even rendering possible (although not profitable) the transmutation of lead into gold.  These theories successfully predicted nuclear weapons. 
Throughout the 1950s and 1960s, a bewildering variety of particles was found in scattering experiments.  This was referred to as the "particle zoo".  Scientists deprecated this term after the formulation of the Standard Model, during the 1970s, in which they explained the large number of particles as combinations of a (relatively) small number of fundamental particles.


Summary 1: Quantum Mechanics for Beginners
Quanta, which are tiny little particles, make up everything. 
Small particles are completely different animals than large objects—a completely different law governs them than the law to that controls large objects.
The visible universe is made up of 3 fermions and 9 bosons (not counting gravity) 
The Standard Model includes all elementary particles and forces, except gravity.
The matter that makes up the visible universe is part of a larger family of particles called the Standard Model.  




 
Big Rules for Small Particles
- Heisenberg's Uncertainty Principle -

He said to them, "It is not for you to know times or epochs which the Father has fixed by His own authority;" [1] 
-Acts 1:7 (NASB) 
However, of that day or hour no one knows, not even the angels in heaven, nor the Son, but the Father alone. [1] 
-Mark 13:32 (NASB) 
Wherefore I was grieved with that generation, and said, They do always err in their heart; and they have not known my ways. [8] 
-Hebrews 3:10 (KJV)
Quantum theory provides us with a striking illustration of the fact that we can fully understand a connection though we can only speak of it in images and parables.
- Werner Heisenberg
Uncertainty
A scientific model or theory is supposed to be a cascade of certainties, and whenever someone uses the word 'uncertainty' most scientists will run for the nearest airlock.
Great therefore, was the consternation when uncertainty appeared to be one of the most characteristic qualities of quantum particles.  Einstein even went as far as to boldly state: “I don't believe that God plays dice!”

But God did.  Or so it seemed.
The year was 1927 when a brilliant 26 year old German named Werner Karl Heisenberg  (pictured here [6]) postulated a principle that would go down in history as the Uncertainty Principle of Heisenberg . It goes like this: 
A large object that moves along a trajectory has, at any point in time, a certain speed and a certain position.  Both speed and position for any point along the track can be accurately calculated or measured.  Yet one cannot accurately know both the speed and position of a quantum particle that zips through space.  Either we know the position of the particle or its speed.  In addition, when we know one of the two accurately, the other one 'hides'.  When we know the speed, we have no idea where the particle is situated.  Moreover, when we know the position of the particle, we are oblivious to its speed.  That is not because we are not smart enough, or our instruments are not accurate enough.  It simply does not exist!  
Heisenberg’s principle implies that it is impossible to simultaneously both measure the present position while "determining" the future momentum of an electron or any other particle with an arbitrary degree of accuracy and certainty.  This is not a statement about researchers' ability to measure one quantity while determining the other quantity.  Rather, it is a statement about the laws of physics.  That is, one cannot define a system to measure, simultaneously, one value while determining the future value of these pairs of quantities.  That is, the quantum space in which a particles momentum and position can be measured does not exist—okay, that’s weird, but things at the quantum level occur at the speed of light.
Principle (2a):
The Uncertainty Principle of Heisenberg: One cannot know, simultaneously, the speed and position a quantum particle.
We like to think of speed and position as two separate things but in fact, they are two sides of one thing.  Just like space and time are really not two but one: space-time.  Einstein was right when he said that God does not play dice.  He doesn't.  Instead, He created the universe on a principle of sovereignty.  Quantum particles are allowed to surround themselves with mere blurs of their intentions.  No one is to know their true speed-position, not even God, because it—speed-position—does not exist and the quantum level, and that is weird.
Historical Introduction
Werner Heisenberg formulated the uncertainty principle at Niels Bohr's institute in Copenhagen, while working on the mathematical foundations of quantum mechanics.
In 1925, following pioneering work with Hendrik Kramers, Heisenberg developed matrix mechanics, which replaced the ad-hoc old quantum theory with modern quantum mechanics.  The central assumption was that the classical motion was not precise at the quantum level, and electrons in an atom did not travel on sharply defined orbits.  Rather, the motion was smeared out in a strange way: the Fourier transform of time only involved those frequencies that could be seen in quantum jumps.
Heisenberg's paper did not admit any unobservable quantities like the exact position of the electron in an orbit at any time; he only allowed the theorist to talk about the Fourier components of the motion.  Since the Fourier components were not defined at the classical frequencies, they could not be used to construct an exact trajectory, so that the formalism could not answer certain overly precise questions about where the electron was or how fast it was going.  The most striking property of Heisenberg's infinite matrices for the position and momentum is that they do not commute. 
In March 1926, working in Bohr's institute, Heisenberg realized that the non-commutativity implies the uncertainty principle.  This was a clear physical interpretation for the non-commutativity, and it laid the foundation for what became we now call as the Copenhagen interpretation of quantum mechanics.  Heisenberg showed that the commutation relation implies an uncertainty, or in Bohr's language a complementarity. [9] Any two variables that do not commute cannot be measured simultaneously—the more precisely one is known, the less precisely the other can be known.
One way to understand the complementarity between position and momentum is by wave-particle duality.  If a particle described by a plane wave passes through a narrow slit in a wall like a water-wave passing through a narrow channel, the particle diffracts and its wave comes out in a range of angles.  The narrower the slit, the wider the diffracted wave is and the greater the uncertainty in momentum afterwards.
The Famous Slot Experiment
Quantum-uncertainty has a very peculiar consequence.  One cannot predict where a particle will end up when we shoot it at a target.  Particles are sovereign and cannot be coerced.
Look at the following diagram of the one slot apparatus: 
 
A particle canon shoots particles at a screen with a slot.  Behind the first screen, we place a recording screen that marks the place of particles impact with a black dot through the slot.  We let the experiment run for a couple of hours, or at least long enough to have fair coverage of possibilities.
If particles were regular objects they would have been easily directed onto the same spot on the recording screen.  However, particles are not regular objects and our recording screen shows a blurred black smudge at the spot we were aiming at.
Obviously most particles hit the recording screen somewhere near our target.  Particles cannot be coerced but they seem nevertheless quite willing to join the fun.
 
Simulated particle hits as might be depicted by the recording screen in the single slot experiment	Yet the black blur does not have a boundary.  It smudges across the entire recording screen, graying out radially until at the edges hardly any impact shows.  It appears that some particles chose to avoid the mainstream and steer for the edge.  In fact, if we had placed recording screens all around the canon, we would have seen impacts everywhere, even behind the canon!  Some particles simply tear a U-turn and hit a wall 180 degrees opposite the one we were shooting at.
We decide to count the number of impacts directly behind the slot in an area with a certain small radius.  Then we count again but cover a larger area.  We count more hits of course, because we have added surface to the first count.  Then we count repeatedly until we have a good picture of the spread of particles.  We plot the numbers in a graph and find a curve that never becomes zero (since particles hit everywhere).  This curve was plotted for the first time in 1925 by an Austrian named Erwin Schrödinger  and has been called the Schrödinger Wave ever since.
Eψ=H ̂ψ (time-independent Schrödinger Wave Equation)
 
(a) 1s electrons(meaning that both electrons are roughly the same distance away from the nucleus) can be "found" anywhere in this solid sphere, centered on the nucleus.  (b) The electron density map plots the points where electrons could be.  The higher density of dots indicates the physical location in which the electron cloud is most dense.  (c) Electron density (Ψ^2) is shown as a function of distance from the nucleus (r) as a graphical representation of the same data used to generate figure b.  (d) The total probability of finding an electron is plotted as a function of distance from the nucleus (r).
Erwin Schrödinger (pictured here [6]) solved the troublesome particle/wave duality paradox that had plagued scientists for so long.  The question of whether things, such as photons, were waves or particles was answered with a loud negation across the board: they are neither, or rather: both!  Quantum particles are particles that propagate through space by means of chance-waves.  Some scientists had detected that wave.  This wave does not propagate through some kind of medium, like water or air, but emerges from the individual sovereignty of quantum particles.  Before quantum theory, waves always ran through a medium, like the ocean.  Take away the wave and you still have water.  A quantum wave does not use a medium; it uses chance.  Take away the wave (which are the particles) and you will be left with nothing.  He is also noted for his so-called Thought Experiment, commonly referred to a Schrödinger’s Cat (see box below).
Schrödinger's Cat
Schrödinger's thought experiment was intended as a discussion of the Einstein-Podolsky-Rosen (EPR) article, named after its authors—Einstein, Podolsky, and Rosen—in 1935. [10] The EPR article had highlighted the strange nature of quantum entanglement:
	 
A quantum state that is a combination of the states of two systems (for example, two subatomic particles), that once interacted but then separated, are not each in a definite state.  The Copenhagen Interpretation implies that the state of the two systems undergoes collapse into a definite state when one of the systems is measured.  Schrödinger and Einstein had exchanged letters about Einstein's EPR article.  In the course this dialog, Einstein had pointed out that, the state of an unstable keg of gunpowder will contain, after a while, a superposition of both exploded and unexploded states.
To illustrate further the incompleteness of quantum mechanics, Schrödinger describes how one could transpose, in principle, the superposition of an atom to large-scale systems of a live and dead cat by coupling cat and atom with the help of a "diabolical mechanism".  He proposed a scenario with a cat in a sealed box, wherein the cat's life or death was dependent on the state of a subatomic particle.  According to Schrödinger, the Copenhagen Interpretation implies that the cat remains both alive and dead (to the universe outside the box) until the box is opened.
Schrödinger did not wish to promote the idea of dead-and-alive cats as a serious possibility; quite the reverse, the paradox is a classic reductio ad absurdum. [11] The thought experiment serves to illustrate the bizarreness of quantum mechanics and the mathematics necessary to describe quantum states.  Intended as a critique of just the Copenhagen Interpretation (the prevailing orthodoxy in 1935), the Schrödinger cat thought experiment remains a topical touchstone for all interpretations of quantum mechanics.  How each interpretation deals with Schrödinger's cat is often used as a way of illustrating and comparing each interpretation's particular features, strengths, and weaknesses.

 
The Famous Two Slots Experiment 
If quantum particles that burst forth from their source behaving like a wave, we should be able to observe interference.
Interference happens when two waves collide and some parts of both waves cancel out and other parts add up.  (To construct a resultant-wave we add up the amplitudes of both waves for all points - above the gray line is positive, below is negative).	 
 
To make two waves in order for them to interfere we take out the slotted screen of our previous experiment and insert a screen with two slots.
We fire at will, and wouldn't you know... interference!  Indeed many particles ride the wave of their identity.  But!  We are not happy so fast.  We decide to fire off one particle at a time with an interval of one minute between particles.  Quantum particles are those things that cannot be divided.
Particles must go through one of the two slots, our intuition dictates.  Firing off particles one at a time should not produce an interference pattern, we think.
A few hours later we return, and find the recording screen adorned with … yep! ... an interference pattern.  How is this possible?
Well, apparently we have stumbled upon the heart of quantum weirdness.  The rule is easily derived, but not easily swallowed.  We will have to choke it down.  Quantum particles are per definition indivisible, but they travel through space according to all the many possibilities from which they have to choose.  They are not compelled to choose one specific trajectory, rather they are allowed to travel all of them, according to the chance that they will. 
Particles will travel everywhere from source to target, like a smear, thick where the particle is most likely to be, and thin where it is most likely not to be.  The smear by which they travel is called a path integral:  the total area covered by all possible trajectories.
Interpretation

In the two-slot experiment the following is true:
The chance that the particle goes through slot 1 is x-percent.  The chance that the particle goes through slot 2 is y-percent.  Chance x and chance y are both Schrödinger-waves and they will engage each other to form an interference pattern behind the two slots.
Quantum particles are indivisible; however, they will interfere with themselves to form complex patterns when they encounter obstacles.  When we repeat the experiment, we will find the same results: approximately the same number of particles hit in certain areas.  Uncertainty appears to have its certainties after all.  Or ..., does it?
What if we shoot one hundred particles at a target and the first ninety-nine of them 'choose' to fit the pattern.  Then, if certainty existed, the hundredth particle would be forced to land in the only spot left by its predecessors.  No so!  There is no way of telling where the hundredth particle will go.  The last one's freedom will always infringe ultimate certainty.
The more particles we fire off the more accurate we can predict how the spread of particles will be.  If we shoot off a million particles, we can quite accurately predict the percentage of hits per area.  If we shoot off a hundred particles, we can still predict how the spread will be but not very accurately.  And if we shoot off one particle, we cannot make any sound prediction where it will end up.  All we can talk about is the chance that our particle will end up in a certain area.
If 95% of one million particles ends up in a radius of 50 centimeter from the projected heart of the slot we can say that there is a 95% chance that particle number one-million-and-one will end up in the same area.  But, this says nothing about the actual destination of the particle.
Principle (2b):
A large number of particles will display a pattern that is near equal to the initial possibilities of a single particle.
A quantum particle cannot be coerced.  If it chooses to do so, it will end up there where only 1% of the particles ended up.  It might even boldly go where no particle has gone before.  Nothing is certain.  Everything is possible.
This brings us to another phenomenon: quantum tunneling, which allows a quantum to simply up-and-leave and show up somewhere else.  In fact, there is a very real yet astronomically small chance that all particles that make up you and this book suddenly decide to zip to Mars.  The chance that this happens naturally is so small that we do not incorporate it in our daily experience of reality.  But, it is certainly not zero.  Quantum tunneling is a very real thing, like say electricity.
Before electricity was comprehended and harnessed by man, all natural manifestation of it (lightning, static electricity, magnetism) must have seemed miraculous and magical, but nowadays we don't think twice about an illuminating light bulb.  It is the same with quantum tunneling.  If the principle is understood and a pact is sealed with the world of the small, large objects such as a human being may be freely transported instantaneously over great distances; like Philip in Acts 8:39, or the disciples in John 6:21.  No magic.  No super natural goings on.  Just a utilization of one of nature's freely available principles.
Still, even particle sovereignty is limited.  Freedom seems to be something that exists between borders.  Freedom has its parameters after all.

Summary 2: The Uncertainty Principle of Heisenberg
Freedom is the most fundamental principle of the universe 
The Uncertainty Principle: Speed and position of a quantum cannot be simultaneously known 
Quanta move along according to the chance that they do, and can interfere with themselves. 
A large number of particles will display a pattern that is near equal to the initial possibilities of a single particle.


 
The Atom
- Demokritos, Rutherford, Bohr and Pauli -
"We all agree that your theory is crazy, but is it crazy enough?" 
-Niels Bohr
The Democritus Atom
The idea of atoms has been around since the fifth century BC.  A jolly philosopher named Demokritos  opposed the popular idea of the four elements (fire, earth, water, and air), and argued that everything is made up from elements that cannot be divided any further.  He called these elements a-thomos, which means indivisible.  It took humanity two and a half millennia to develop the technology needed to pierce through to the level of those smallest indivisible things.  When experiments verified the existence of those structures that we now call atoms, everybody thought they had found Demokritos' indivisibles.  That is why they called them atoms.  (Like Columbus naming the American Natives 'Indians'.  Same thing) 
Backs were patted, applause sounded, medals of valor were passed around by shaking hands.  But as in any theory, there was something fishy about the atom, something that could not be explained.  In 1911 a man named Ernest Rutherford  (pictured here [6]) was shooting so-called alpha radiation at a thin sheet of gold (while hollering Onward Christian Soldiers full blast through the lab).  What he did not know and what nobody knew was that the alpha particles that make up alpha radiation were in fact the bare nuclei of helium atoms; and he was shooting them at gold atoms. 
 	Most of the alpha particles zipped clean through the gold but some were diverted and some even bounced straight back.  By the way the alpha particles behaved, Rutherford concluded that 99% of an atoms mass was concentrated at the core.  
Atoms were not indivisible at all!  They had some kind of inner structure.  
Bummer!
The Bohr Atom
Sounds of dismay ripped through the realm, glory was rescinded, and champagne poured back in the bottle.  However, a fine young man named Niels Bohr  (below, right [6]) saved the day by coming up with an atom-model that has been known as the Bohr Atom (below, left) ever since.
                       
Niels was not an exceptionally smart man, he just had a vivid imagination, and, according to Einstein, that is often more important than raw processor speed.  Niels figured out that what we call an atom is in fact a tiny nucleus surrounded by a cloud of electrons.  These electrons, Niels demanded, were situated in spheres around the nucleus and they could jump from one sphere to a larger one by absorbing one quantum of energy (which is exactly one photon because besides lighting everything up and keeping everything together, photons also make everything move).
That was in 1913, and although Bohr received the Nobel Prize for physics in 1922 for his atom model—that still stands today—it failed to explain why there were so many different elements.  Elements in the periodic table are the way they are because electrons do not just simply huddle around the nucleus in the tightest ring. Instead, they refuse electrons to join when a ring is full.  Hence, some electrons are kept in outer rings and elements maintain their uniqueness .  How do atoms do that? 

 

The black bar is one ångström 
(10−10 m or 100 pm).	A depiction of the atomic structure of the helium atom.  The darkness of the electron cloud corresponds to the line-of-sight integral over the probability function of the 1s atomic orbital of the electron.  The magnified nucleus is schematic, showing protons (top and bottom) and neutrons (left and right).  In reality, the nucleus (and the wavefunction of each of the nucleons) is also spherically symmetric and 1s.  Also, the four particles, each with a different quantum number, like the electrons in the helium atom, are all most likely to be found in the same space, at the exact center of the nucleus. [6]

Pauli's Exclusion Principle
The answer came in 1926 by a young genius named Wolfgang Pauli  (picture here [6]) who postulated the Exclusion Principle.  It roughly states that no fermion (such as electrons) can share a spot with another one (and remember a 'spot' for a quantum particle is a blur of most likely spots).  This is in contrast to bosons that can be piled upon the same fermion until it is blue in the face.  Pauli discovered that electrons have four characteristics, some of which can have two values (one or zero; yea or nay, etc.), leaving the electron eight separate states to exist in.  The Exclusion Principle states that two electrons that have identical values for those four characteristics cannot occupy the same sphere around the nucleus.  Hence, only eight electrons per sphere are allowed and the elements were explained.
The Creator deemed it fitting to not only give all quantum particles sovereignty in matters of their progression, He also gave electrons an inescapable unique perspective on the nucleus they were orbiting.  The so-called limitation of a quantum's sovereignty does not actually limit the particle; it forces it into unicity—meaning uniqueness.
Principle (3):
The Exclusion Principle: Two electrons that have identical values cannot occupy the same position relative to the nucleus.
Before we dive into the really cool stuff, we have to make one more stop: the nursery, where all those free-living quantum creatures are born from cabbages way beyond any cabbage you have ever seen... 

Summary 3: The Atom: Demokritos, Bohr, Rutherford and Pauli
Atoms consist of a tiny nucleus surrounded by electrons that are kept together by means of the electromagnetic force. 
The atomic orbital model or Bohr Atom is the currently accepted model of the placement of electrons in an atom.
All electrons have a unique perspective on the nucleus they are orbiting.

 
Quantum Foam
- Did the Stork Bring Quantum Particles?-
Light and matter are both single entities, and the apparent duality arises in the limitations of our language.
- Werner Heisenberg
The Frank Equation
Despite persistent rumors to the contrary, close observation and some well-established theories have yielded the strong suspicion that neither babies nor quantum particles come from cabbages.  Look at the following equation: 
 
The belief in childbearing cabbages has been largely abandoned, because there is no natural or artificial process or stuff to add that will allow a cabbage to bring forth Frank .  Frank and the cabbage are simply too remote.  Source and product must inherently relate and Frank and the cabbages do not.  Frank came not from cabbages but from two families united in the marriage of Frank's parents: ovum + spermatozoon = zygote → blastocyst → Frank!  But, quantum particles cannot grow.  There is nothing smaller than a quantum; a quantum cannot be composed of smaller or previous things.  A quantum particle either exists or does not; and when it exists, it can absorb energy so that it can move.  But, before it exists, it cannot do anything.  It's not there! 
Relativity Theory: A Bank Account of Motion
Albert Einstein discovered so many things that he became a legend while still alive.  One of the discoveries he is most famous for is that energy (the stuff that binds, or causes motion, or allows us to see things) and mass are deeply akin.  If we would take the Frank Equation and change the cabbage into energy and Frank into mass, then we could change the whole chunk {+ some stuff + some process} for {divide by c2} to make perfect sense: E⁄(c^2=m).   A more familiar form is E=mc^2. [12]
 	c = a number, known as the speed of light.  (Technically spoken, c is not a speed because at light-speed time freezes and distances become zero, leaving no meters and seconds to allow a meters-per-second speed).
mass = the quality of an object that causes weight when the object is placed in a gravitational field.
The mass of an astronaut does not change even though she weighs less on the moon than on earth.  

Mass is also the quality of matter that causes gravitation.  We are pulled towards the earth because (1) the earth has mass and (2) we have mass.
Einstein realized that there is no difference between sitting in a gravitational field (such as the one that is keeping you in your chair right now) and sitting in some accelerating vehicle (like a rocket).
In other words, gravity allows the universe to trick objects into believing that they are accelerating while they are in fact motionless.
Principle (4a)
When a massive object sits motionless in a gravitational field, it thinks it is constantly absorbing energy, and hence keeps accelerating.
Gravity-caused-by-mass and acceleration-caused-by-the-absorption-of-energy are deeply akin.  Mass is to the universe as a bank account of motion, and the universe has a virtual fortune stored in stars and planets and other massive structures; and just like any other fortune is made up of cents, the universe's fortune of motion is made up of quantum particles.  Just as you cannot maintain a bank account with values lower than one cent, the universe cannot store energy in chunks smaller than a quantum particle.  That means that reality, as we know it—the total of objects and physical and chemical processes, including space and time itself, since time is caused by particles interacting—commences at the birth of quanta.  There is a certain level of energy required to make one quantum, and below that certain level reality, as we know it, does not exist.  That does not mean that nothing exists; it is just something else.
Relativity Theory and the Speed of Light
Science is pretty certain about the round-trip speed of light.  However, uncertainty perplexes them when it comes to one-way speed of light.  In fact, it cannot be measured.  Hence, it is possible that light (photons) travel one-way instantaneously.  This would explain how light could reach the earth from distant galaxies within a short interval of time.  (See the Starlight Problem in Chapter 6.)  Einstein’s theory of relativity tells us that if we could travel at the speed of light, the trip (one-way, at least) would be instantaneous.  As far as light is concerned, it takes relatively little time to travel from a distant galaxy to earth [13]. 
Principe (4b)
The one-way speed of light may theoretically be instantaneous, thus taking no time to reach the observer from distant points.
How far can one travel from the Earth?
Since one cannot travel faster than light, one might conclude that a human can never travel further from Earth than 40 light years, if the traveler is active between the age of 20 and 60.  One would easily think that a traveller would never be able to reach more than the very few solar systems that exist within the limit of 20-40 light years from the earth.  But that would be a mistaken conclusion.  Because of time dilation , he can travel thousands of light years during his 40 active years [12].  If the spaceship accelerates at a constant 1G, he will (mathematically) reach almost the speed of light after a little less than a year, but time dilation will increase his life span to thousands of years, seen from the reference system of the Solar System, but his subjective lifespan will not thereby change.  If he returns to Earth, he will land thousands of years into its future.  Even if he should accelerate for a longer period, his speed will not be seen as higher than the speed of light by observers on Earth, and he will not measure his speed as being higher than the speed of light.  This is because he will see a length contraction  of the universe in his direction of travel [12].  And during the journey, people on Earth will experience much more time than he does.  So, although his (ordinary) speed cannot exceed c, his four-velocity (distance as seen by Earth, divided by his proper (i.e. subjective) time) can be much greater than c.  This is similar to the fact that a muon can travel much further than c times its half-life (when at rest), if it is traveling close to c.
Back to the Frank Equation
If we change Frank into a quantum particle, we are looking for something into which we can change the cabbages, and the process-part, so that we get a statement that makes sense.  The cabbages are easy: energy.  However, if we define a quantum particle as one cent in a bank account there is nothing to which we can change the process-part.  There is nothing prior to a cent save perhaps the wish that we had one.
So, let's forget about the cent-definition and let's look at a quantum particle's defining behavior; and that behavior is dictated by the Schrödinger wave equation .  Hence, we define a quantum particle as “something that travels through the universe according to the chance that it goes somewhere.”
In addition, with the help of a little Bohrian fantasy we conclude that the process that turns energy into a quantum particle must have something to do with chance.  Something that lives by the likelihood that it is somewhere comes forth from the likelihood that it is at all!
Okay, I admit, that was a little abstract and esoteric.  The realm of quantum particles is so very different from our large-scale world that it is hard to come up with a metaphor; but I found one:
Imagine someone overlooking the Jeffrey Strickland Author Spotlight page at Lulu.com.  She feels herself being drawn into the fascinating display.  After some procrastinating, she selects a title; begins to read; feels an urge build up to purchase the book; reads some more and the urge turns to desire.  “A fine book,” she mumbles, “Great for a gift.”  Sweat breaks on her brow as she moves the pointer towards the ‘order’ button.  And..., click!  The book is hers!  It has entered her reality as a physical entity.  Her life has been enriched.
Now imagine all the thousands upon thousands of people that visit Lulu.com every day; and all tarry in wonder at the Jeffrey Strickland Author Spotlight page.  Some will not feel any urge.  They will leave sneering and shoulder shrugging.  Some others will feel the urge but resist and leave without having purchased anything.  But many, yea many, will follow where the urge leads and call the displayed into reality.
 
That is exactly what it is like in the universe.  The vacuum of space is not a vast absence of anything, just a vast absence of particles.  Yet, below the particle level there is an ocean of turbulence, jars and jolts just below that level, eddies of chance, vortices of possibilities; and the magic phrases are:
The Uncertainty Principle
According to the Uncertainty Principle, one cannot say in certainty and truth that a quantum particle is somewhere.  Hence, one also cannot say that a quantum particle is not somewhere.
The quantum world has a Murphy's Law  equivalent with the authority of the Ten Commandments: anything that can happen must happen. 
Thus, that quantum particles simply pop up where ever there is space; out there, out there somewhere, but also in your head and on the table in front of you.  But do not worry; they are obviously harmless; and they all pop up from the sub-quantum circus, which is also everywhere, including your head.
The person who first thought about this eccentric sub-quantum turbulence was a chap named John Archibald Wheeler, and he called it quantum foam.  That somewhat unfortunate phrase allows us to talk about it but keep in mind that (1) it is about sub-quantum reality.  (2) The word foam calls into mind something very ordinary, which the phenomenon is most certainly not.  (3) The phrase calls into mind something foamy made from something that foams, which is also not the case.
Remember that a particle is a bundle of possibilities.  When the vacuum of space builds up to make a particle, it is not like adding sugar to a cup of coffee or air to a tire but increasing probability.  Just like a quantum particle is a kernel of mass and a bundle of possible behaviors, so is energy itself endowed with two inherent insoluble qualities: to bind/ move/ produce and to make the possible probable.
	Same	Utterly other
Realm of quantum particles and the things they make	Main rule = probability (chance)
Individual reality, mechanical pulses among them & space-time continuum
Quantum foam
Main rule = probability
No individual reality, no pulses possible & no space-time continuum

Principle (4c):
Below the level at which particles can exist and thus interact and make structures, there is quantum foam, which is activity deeply akin to particles, but of a different reality, which cannot make structures, as we know them.
One more matter 
There is one more quantum-peculiarity we need to address and that is the weird story of matter and anti-matter.
Quantum particles are really part of a two-some, and they never are born alone.
 
When the energy-activity of the vacuum reaches the level at which quantum particles can arise, a quantum of energy (that would be one photon) may split into two particles (i.e. an electron and an anti-electron, a.k.a. positron).
That means that for every particle that makes up every object you can see—including yourself—there is or used to be an antiparticle.
The trajectories of things like airplanes and slugs are describable by fairly simple equations.  However, things that either move very fast or are very small put the best watches and rulers to shame.
The occurrence of a particle-antiparticle pair popping up is one event, and it ‘happens’ both towards the ‘future’ (like things in our own lives do) and towards the ‘past’, which is like running up and down the stairs at the same instant.  Ergo, time and space are not taken very seriously at very small scales.
Can it really anti-matter?
A particle is identical to its antiparticle except that the electrical charges are reversed.  That causes the direction of time to reverse.  A particle is born there where an anti-particle dies, and vice versa. 
When particle and antiparticle meet, they annihilate.  In nature, that usually means that they turn into one photon.  In laboratories, particles and anti-particles are excited to energy levels that belong to a mere few moments after The Beginning, and when these highly agitated creatures meet, a rainbow of other particles emerge from the energy of their encounter. 
Principle (4d)
Particles and antiparticles are identical except the electrical charges are reversed.  When particle and anti-particle meet, they annihilate.
All anti-matter companions of the particles that make up the visible universe are missing.  They're gone!  Nobody knows where they are.  There is no large amount of anti-matter stored in the visible universe.  This is one of the last standing mysteries.  If you can figure out how the matter-antimatter balance in the universe has become undone, you might get the Nobel Prize for physics. 
As said before, the quantum particles that make up our world are the survivors of a large family of elementary particles.  Scientists have discovered that the universe commenced by bringing forth this family in its entirety, then allowed this family to die out, and only then proceeded to build the structures with which we are now familiar.  Scientists do not understand, very well, why this had to happen like this.  Why could not all family members survive to make an even more complex universe for us all to live in?  Things would have been quite different, that is for sure, but they are not.  The family of most elementary particles has mostly vanished and the few survivors have inherited the universe.  In order to understand who these survivors are, we will have to look at their entire family.
Summary 4: A look at quantum foam
Matter feels no difference between gravity and acceleration. 
The visible universe consists of stable particles that connect and thus make space and time. 
Energy and mass are related by E = mc^2, where c is the two-way speed of light.
Below the energy level at which particles can exist, there is an ocean of chance (called quantum foam); no connectedness and no stability. 
Particles always arise in pairs: matter and antimatter. 
The one-way speed of light may be instantaneous.


 
The Standard Model
- A common Arrangement of Fundamental Particles -
Tapestries are made by many artisans working together.  The contributions of separate workers cannot be discerned in the completed work, and the loose and false threads have been covered over.  So it is in our picture of particle physics.
-Sheldon Lee Glashow
Breaches in symmetry
Imagine having your eyes closed and somebody gives you two objects—two cubes, 1 and 2—in your hands.  The two cubes are identical in shape and you understand the two cubes to be similar; you would only need one definition to describe both objects.	 
Then you open your eyes and one cube appears to be light gray while the other is darker (1a and 2a).  Now the two objects are different and you would need two definitions to describe them.	 
When you had your eyes closed, the two objects were the same.  We speak of symmetry.  When you open your eyes, the symmetry breaches and you have two different objects.
Now imagine that you do not have eyes.  Nobody has eyes.  Nature has not yet produced eyes.  In fact, nature has not produced any way to determine the difference between the two cubes.  That means that the difference between the two cubes is not yet part of reality, and in a way that sits on a ‘very slippery slope’, we can say that the difference between the two cubes does not exist.  Then nature comes up with eyes to see and in their wake lays the difference between the two cubes.  In that same slippery way, we can say that when nature produces a way to discern differences, these differences are produced along with it.  That is how it went in The Beginning.
According the most plausible theories, the universe commenced in a condition of complete symmetry; we would only need one definition to describe this initial condition.  That definition is often called the Grand Unification Theory  (GUT) and it is still unknown to humankind.  In other words, we know that the universe commenced as a singularity but we have no idea how that would translate into understandable mathematics.
The various fundamental particles popped out of the quantum foam and, apart from their masses, their differences were not discernible because there was only one force at work in the universe.  Imagine having only one sense, like the tactile sense with which we identified the cubes at first.  The cube is there, or it is not.  No further details can be observed.  Right after The Beginning, all particles responded to the one and only force and there was no way to identify inherent differences, and so there were none.  In retrospect, we call this force the Grand Unified Force  (GUF); only because we know its symmetry was bound to breach; and when it did, there came to be two forces: gravity and the strong-electro-weak force.
 
Now particles responded to gravity by means of their mass or amount of energy, or they responded by means of their strong-electro-weak charge; and the breaching went on.
 
The strong-electro-weak force spawned the strong nuclear force and the electro-weak force.  This caused two major groups of fundamental particles to be identified: quarks that responded to all three existing forces and leptons that did not respond to the strong nuclear force.  In our tactile/visual analogy of the cubes, leptons would be those particles that we can feel but not see, while quarks are particles that we can feel and see.  This caused a significant change in particles dynamics.  In addition, because quarks are generally more massive than leptons, we speak of the ‘mass-dominated era’.
The final breach in symmetry happened when the electro-weak force broke apart into the electromagnetic force and the weak force.  This breach in symmetry only marked a further difference in the lepton-tribe.  Those leptons that had electromagnetic charge followed electromagnetism (EM), and those leptons that did not have electromagnetic charge (the neutrinos) did not follow electromagnetism. 
The four forces of nature
When the era of symmetry breaches ended, there were four forces, and those four identified all the various differences between the existing fundamental particles:
Force	Boson	Function	Range
Gravity
Graviton	Gravity curves space.  It always attracts, never repels.  Gravity is the only force to which all particles are subjected.	Indefinite
Strong Force	Gluon (8 kinds)	The strong force binds quarks into nucleons and nucleons into nuclei.
Limited to the atomic nucleus

Electromagnetism (EM)	Photon	Electromagnetism binds electrons to the nucleus.  By doing so, electromagnetism allows all physical and chemical processes to happen.	Indefinite
Weak Force	Weak bosons
(3 kinds)	The weak force causes unstable particles and nuclei to decay.
Limited to the atomic nucleus

The particles
As stated before, we can divide material particles into three fundamental groups: 
	bosons, which are bits of force, not real particles; 
	quarks, which are electrically charged, either positive or negative, and which form atomic nucleons that contains most of the mass of the visible universe; and 
	leptons which either have a negative electrical charge or no charge at all (in which case they are called neutrino's, and which make the universe a lively place in which a lot more happens than simply bumping into each other.
There are 12 quarks and 12 leptons although some demand that there is only six of each.  In fact, there is six of each and each has an anti-particle--six of each plus six anti-of-each.  However, because particles have only a handful of characteristics, a reversed electrical charge (which defines an anti-particle) alters the nature of a particle by such a big percentage that most feel confident to speak of 12 different particles of each kind, even though there is a strong kinship between six pairs.  So, here is the Standard Model in its fullness but keep in mind that every quark and lepton has an anti-quark or anti-lepton that is just as real and corporeal as the normal sibling it was named after (electron and anti-electron or positron; down quark and anti-down, etc.).
Of the lepton bunch you should know that every charged one has a sibling that is not charged, called a neutrino. 
Principle (5)
The Standard Model (SM) Theory of particle physics provides a framework for explaining chemistry and nuclear physics (low energy processes).  It additionally provides an explanation for sub-nuclear physics and some aspects of cosmology in the earliest moments of the universe (high energy processes).
 
The Standard Model :
Name	Mass 	Charge
Quarks
	
Up	10 	1/3
Down	2012	-1/3
Charm	313112	2/3
Strange	352***	-1/3
Top	35225012	2/3
Bottom	880612	-1/3
Leptons		
Electron	1	-1
E-neutrino
Almost 0	0
Muon	207	-1
Mu-neutrino
Almost 0	0
Tau	3466	-1
Tau-neutrino
Almost 0	0
Bosons		
Photon (EM)	0	0
Z^0 (WF)	178450	0
W^+ (WF)	157104	1
W^- (WF)	157104	-1
Gluon (SF)	012	0
	The evolution of the Standard Model over time:

 

Also, note all qualities of the particles are listed here; and the graviton is usually not listed in the Standard Model because gravity is negative energy while all other energy is positive.  It is not very complicated, but read Kip Thorne's Black Holes and Time Warps  [14] if you want to know more. 
Super-symmetry and the Higgs particle
For certain reasons, physicists strongly suspect that beyond the symmetries of the Standard Model another incredible symmetry lurks; super-symmetry, and that a particle must exist that is unlike all other particles and which gives all other particles their mass: the Higgs particle , named after physicist Peter Higgs (pictured here [6]). 
The theories of super-symmetry—which are very likely true but still unproven to date—demand that every particle and anti-particle of the Standard Model has a super-symmetric partner, also known as a super-partner or simply ‘spartner’.  Normally these super-particles are named after the particle they accompany and are prefixed with a 's': electron and selectron, quark and squark.  And, if these sparticles had survived, the early universe there might have been sstars and splanets, perhaps even speople who drink sbeer and tell sjokes.  But no, there was to be a greater fate.
As stated before, this initial family of particles was thoroughly thinned out during the turmoil of the early universe.  In the next chapter, we will discuss which heinous plague struck this utterly royal family, for never was a story of more woe than this of the Universe and her Standard Model.
 
Standard Model Pros and Cons
The Standard Model of particle physics is a theory, which describes the strong, weak, and electromagnetic fundamental forces, as well as the fundamental particles that make up all matter.  Developed between 1970 and 1973, it is a quantum field theory, and consistent with both quantum mechanics and special relativity.  To date, almost all experimental tests of the three forces described by the Standard Model have agreed with its predictions.  However, the Standard Model is not a complete theory of fundamental interactions, primarily because it does not describe gravity.
Although the Standard Model has had great success in explaining experimental results, it has never been accepted as a complete theory of fundamental physics.  This is because it has two important defects: 
	The model contains 19 free parameters, such as particle masses, which must be determined experimentally (plus another 10 for neutrino masses).  These parameters cannot be independently calculated. 
	The model does not describe the gravitational interaction. 
Since the completion of the Standard Model, scientists have made many efforts to address these problems. 
One attempt to address the first defect is known as grand unification.  The so-called ‘Grand Unified Theories (GUTs)’ hypothesized that the SU(3), SU(2), and U(1) groups  are actually subgroups of a single large symmetry group.  At high energies (far beyond the reach of current experiments), the symmetry of the unifying group is preserved; at low energies, it reduces to SU(3)×SU(2)×U(1) by a process known as spontaneous symmetry breaking.  The first theory of this kind was proposed in 1974 by Georgi and Glashow, using SU(5) as the unifying group.  A distinguishing characteristic of these GUTs is that, unlike the Standard model, they predict the existence of proton decay.  In 1999, the Super-Kamiokande neutrino observatory reported that it had not detected proton decay, establishing a lower limit on the proton half-life of 6.7 times 1032 years.  This and other experiments have falsified numerous GUTs, including SU(5).
In addition, there are cosmological reasons why the standard model is believed to be incomplete.  Within it, matter and antimatter are symmetric.  While the preponderance of matter in the universe can be explained by saying that the universe just started out this way, this explanation strikes most physicists as inelegant.  Furthermore, the Standard Model provides no mechanism to generate the cosmic inflation that is believed to have occurred at the beginning of the universe, a consequence of its omission of gravity. 
The Higgs boson (particle), which is predicted by the Standard Model, has not been observed as of 2005.  Nevertheless, some phenomena have been observed in the last days of the ‘Large Electron-Positron (LEP)’ collider, which could be related to the Higgs; one of the reasons to build the LHC is that the increase in energy is expected to make the Higgs observable). 
The first experimental deviation from the Standard Model came in 1998, when Super-Kamiokande published results indicating neutrino oscillation.  This implied the existence of non-zero neutrino masses, since massless particles travel at the speed of light and so do not experience the passage of time.  The Standard Model did not accommodate massive neutrinos, because it assumed the existence of only ‘left-handed’ neutrinos, which have spin aligned counter-clockwise to their axis of motion.  If neutrinos have non-zero mass, they necessarily travel slower than the speed of light.  Therefore, it would be possible to ‘overtake’ a neutrino, choosing a reference frame in which its direction of motion is reversed without affecting its spin (making it right-handed).  Since then, physicists have revised the Standard Model to allow neutrinos to have mass, which make up additional free parameters beyond the initial 19. 
A further extension of the Standard Model can be found in the theory of supersymmetry (SUSY), which proposes a massive supersymmetric ‘partner’ for every particle in the conventional Standard Model.  Supersymmetric particles have been suggested as a candidate for explaining dark matter [15].
(The contents of this article are licensed from Wikipedia.org under the GNU Free Documentation License.)

Summary 5: The Standard Model
A quality only exists if a way to determine it exists.  Nature identifies qualities by means of the four forces of nature. 
There are four natural forces: Gravity, Electromagnetism, Strong Nuclear Force, and Weak Nuclear Force. 
There are three fundamental kinds of particles: quarks, leptons and bosons. 
All particles are governed by Gravity. 
All electrically charged particles listen to Electromagnetism (EM).  All neutral particles are deaf to EM. 
All Quarks and Quark-compounds listen to the Weak Nuclear Force.  All leptons are deaf to the Weak Force. 
All quarks listen to the Strong Nuclear Force.  All leptons are deaf to the Strong Force.

 
Does the Universe Expand?
- Wars & Famine, Nucleosynthesis & the Great Light -
For astronomy is not only pleasant, but also very useful to be known: it cannot be denied that this art unfolds the admirable wisdom of God.
-John Calvin
Is the Author an Insane Heretic?
I imagine that you will ask yourself this question before you get very far into this chapter—if you haven’t already concluded thus—but, the “science” that follows can only be made plausible by one explanation of The Beginning: Creation.  So, please bear with me and continue reading.
Does the Universe Expand?
No, it does not.  You've been had.  In 1929 Edwin Hubble  (pictured here [6]—after him the most famous telescope in the history of telescopes was named) discovered that all those countless galaxies out there are moving away from each other.  That can only mean that at any point in our past all those galaxies were closer than they are today; and if you would go back in time far enough you would eventually end up, together with all the galaxies and everything that exists in space-time, in one point.  The headlines excitedly read, that means that our universe is expanding!  “Yahoo!”, said everyone, except Einstein and a whole bunch of others who had grafted their reality model on a religion, which dictated that the universe had been created the way it was and did not change.  This is quite peculiar since everything changes, and even in the Bible, nothing ever stays the way it was.  That is beside the point.
The point is that when scientists reported that the galaxies disperse, the general public understood that the universe expands; that it gets larger.  Well, no.  The universe is the only thing that has an inside but no outside.  There is no space outside space into which space could expand.  Space does not get larger because in order to get larger it needs an outside to be bigger.  Doesn't have one.  Yet galaxies move away from each other.  What is the answer to this paradox?
The answer is that the universe does not expand, but implodes.  
Principle (6a)
The universe is the only thing that has an inside but no outside.
Think about it.  The light from a star that sits 4 thousand light years away from Earth needs 4 thousand years to get here—although the one-way speed could be instantaneous and no time would elapse.  That means that we see the star the way it was 4 thousand years ago—or an instant ago (pretty confusing!).  Moreover, it does not matter where it sits (over the North Pole, over Sidney, over Boston) as long as it sits 4 thousand light years away from us—or some undetermined distance if we use the one-way speed of light.  That means that ‘4 thousand years ago’—if this is measured in the two-way speed of light—is a sphere around us.  Any star upon that sphere is 4 thousand light years away and we see them all as they were 4 thousand years ago.  Same for 10 thousand, except that this is a larger sphere since all stars upon that sphere are 10 thousand light years away.  Same with 15 thousand years.  The Beginning is a sphere that encompasses us, and there is nothing larger than it is.  Whatever brought us forth, it brought forth in such a way that everything that exists was made in The Beginning.  Imagine that!  We are in the Beginning.
To serve common vernacular, we speak of the ‘expanding’ universe.  Now you know better.  If scientists postulate that a star is 4 million light years from the earth, then it introduces a cosmological problem referred to as the distant starlight problem for dating the age of the universe.  A solution to the so-called Starlight Problem was addressed in Chapter 4 (Relativity and Speed—the one-way speed of light, one-way).
Distant Starlight Problem
Answers in Genesis (AiG) believes that all stars and planetary bodies, including the Earth, were created around 6,000 years ago.  They reject most of the mainstream scientific thinking behind dominant theories of cosmology. [16]
The distant starlight problem poses a challenge to a young universe.  It presents the dilemma of how one can observe light from objects millions or billions of light years away in a young universe.  Some creationists have attempted to answer this with explanations involving God creating light en-route, or by claiming that the speed of light was faster in the past, an argument also referred to as c-decay.  AiG rejects both of these proposed solutions [17] and tentatively prefers a model proposed by creationist physicist Russell Humphreys [18] called ‘White Hole Cosmology’.  This creationist cosmology requires that the Milky Way lie near the center of the universe; a suggestion that AiG believes is supported by claims of quantized redshifts. [19] Creationists Hugh Ross and Samuel R. Conner have rejected Humphreys' model on scientific grounds. [20]
The idea of the Milky Way existing near the center of the universe is similar to modern geocentrism, but AiG has intentionally distanced themselves from claims that the planet Earth is the exact center of the universe.  AiG believes that the creationists' distant starlight problem is similar to the historically significant ‘horizon problem’ of the Big Bang theory. [21]  While the consensus of cosmologists is ‘the horizon problem is solved by inflationary theory as a model for the universe’, [22] there is no creationist consensus on the solution to the distant starlight problem.  See also “The Anisotropic Synchrony Convention” by Dr. Jason Lisle at www.answersingenesis.org.
 
Wars
The early universe was a lot ‘smaller’ than it is today, and it contained far more particles than it does today.  In fact, the universe is really quite empty compared with what it used to be.  In addition, it was not translucent.  There were so many particles zipping about at such high speeds that no particle (and that includes the light-particle or photon) was able to travel very far without being intercepted by some other particle and blasted into oblivion or else bursts of other particles that zipped off, collided, decayed, were replaced by others.
Particles always arise as matter-antimatter pairs and in the early universe, there was not a lot more than pairs popping up and annihilating instantaneously.  And the rub is that both regular space and time are consequences of many particles interacting.  This means that the early universe did not really contain space as we know it, and ‘things’ didn’t really happen, because there was no time.  All that existed was a thicket of thorns that busked and sizzled without the means of interacting or make lasting structures such as objects or even space-time as we know it.  Particles lived tiny and insignificant lives; bursts of eternity brought back to a single instant.  No glory.  No memory.  A gloomy business for sure...  But no matter how bad a situation is, it can always get worse; and it did. 
Famine
Because the universe ‘expanded’, the energy density grew less and less; and those particles that had a large mass (which after all is ‘solidified’ energy) became tougher to produce, while the killing continued at much the same rate.  This period in our universe's history has been dubbed the era of the ‘quark slaughter’, although the larger leptons befell the same fate and died out.  The killing went on until only the smallest particles remained: all the gluons, the photon, the up- and down-quarks, the electron and its e-neutrino.
And for some reason, which is still unknown, the balance of matter and antimatter shifted slightly in favor of regular matter.  This shift resulted in a minute excess of regular matter and while all other matter and anti-matter cancelled each other out, the excess of regular matter survived and went on to live happily ever after.  All of the matter that makes up our universe today, including planet earth and her dwellers was present at the birth of time and survived the fiercest era of destruction our realm has ever known.
Think about it.  If particles were sentient beings they could all remember being part of this incredible turmoil, a world in which fellow particles arose and were killed off before they could come to make a difference.  And suddenly, something happened that no one could have anticipated.  The dying ceased.  Vast planes of space stretched out ahead in distances no one could have known were there.  Suddenly there was room to travel, as the survivors were a truly minute part of all the particles that ever existed—like sole surviving a great disease that wiped out an entire city, being left with nothing but space.  They were alive in a realm of unprecedented grandness, alive without the prospect of ever having to die.
But that was not all.  There was something else. 
The Nucleosynthesis 
Some brief instances after the initiation of the Standard Model family of particles, the quark chapter discovered qualities within themselves that allowed them to bond with other quarks by means of the strong force and always in groups of three.  By bonding, they were able to form new particles—we call these particles protons—that were incredibly heavy compared to any of the leptons.  And since this era was still mass dominated they became the most powerful creatures around, bouncing about and knocking smaller particles out of their path, like what herds of cows could do to a squirrel.
Later these protons would constitute the nuclei of atoms, and so we call the formation of protons the “nucleosynthesis”.  However, since atoms did not yet exist, these protons were not really nucleons.  They only possessed the qualities required to become nucleons, if the need arose; and it did when the mass-dominated era was surpassed by a new one.
The mass-dominated era came to a halt and another era commenced.  An era in which particles connected to each other in an odd and marvelous way, and individual life gave rise to a new kind of living; the formation of the first atoms.  There was eternal life.  There was connectedness of such vehemence that it resulted in new, atomic ‘life’ forms.  In addition, there was a light, a ‘Great Light’ that set the entire universe ablaze.  It gave particles the ability to bond and which supplied particles and the atoms they formed with an unending source of fuel: fuel to travel; to engage; and to make objects, stars and planets.  Soon they would be able to make an even greater thing: that which is generally known as a living creature; cells made from atoms; cells that fed and reproduced; cells that were autonomous and were able to capture the Great Light.  Instead of degenerating it into kinetic energy or heat were able to transform it into a chemical or electrical equivalent: the miracle of life. 
Principle (6b)
All particles were created at ‘The Beginning.  Nucleosynthesis makes new atomic nuclei from pre-existing nucleons (protons and neutrons).
The Beginning Nucleosynthesis
The Beginning nucleosynthesis occurred within the first three minutes of the beginning of the universe and is responsible for much of the abundance of 1H (protium), 2H (D, deuterium), 3He (helium-3), and 4He (helium-4), in the universe.  Although 4He continues to be produced by other mechanisms (such as stellar fusion and alpha decay) and trace amounts of 1H continue to be produced by spallation and certain types of radioactive decay (proton emission and neutron emission), most of the mass of these isotopes in the universe, and all but the insignificant traces of the 3He and deuterium in the universe produced by rare processes such as cluster decay, are thought to have been produced in The Beginning. The nuclei of these elements, along with some 7Li, and 7Be are believed to have been formed when the universe was between 100 and 300 seconds old, after the primordial quark-gluon plasma thawed out to form protons and neutrons.  Because of the very short period in which The Beginning nucleosynthesis occurred before being stopped by expansion and cooling (about 20 minutes after The Beginning), no elements heavier than beryllium (or possibly boron) could be formed.  (Elements formed during this time were in the plasma state, and did not cool to the state of neutral atoms until much later).
The Great Light
In the Beginning Elohim created the heavens and the earth.  The earth was formless and void, and darkness was over the surface of the deep, and the Spirit of Elohim was moving over the surface of the waters.
Then Elohim said, "Let there be light"; and there was light. [1]
-Genesis 1:1 (NASB)
As said before, initially the universe was not translucent—darkness or absence of light characterized to universe.  Compare conditions of the early universe with an ordinary cloud in the sky.  Made from tiny droplets of water, the cloud seems almost solid even though it is not.  The early universe was far more energetic than a simple cloud, but the effect was the same.  Free roaming particles caught and emitted photons  continuously and no photon could travel very far on its own.  After the nucleosynthesis the universe kept on expanding but both protons and electrons were still too energetic to bond and the e-neutrinos were not even able to bond and kept running around like ‘headless chickens’.
Long after the nucleosynthesis, the energy density of the universe dropped below a certain level and electrons were able to stick to nucleons by means of an electromagnetic field.  That moment marked the beginning of ‘reality’ as we know it.  As soon as electrons connected to protons to make hydrogen atoms, the universe became transparent and light could travel unobstructed from one region to another.  Atoms were able to stick together, to form an economy based on thermodynamic and electromagnetic interactions.  Soon particles gathered into stars and the universe became what it is now.
Solar System Abundances
 
(This work is licensed under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 3.0 License.)
This figure shows the abundances of the chemical elements in the Solar system.  Hydrogen and helium are most common, from The Beginning.  The next three elements (Li, Be, B) are rare because they are poorly synthesized in The Beginning and in stars.  The two general trends in the remaining stellar-produced elements are: (1) an alternation of abundance in elements as they have even or odd atomic numbers, and (2) a general decrease in abundance, as elements become heavier.  Within this trend, a slight preponderance of iron and nickel is seen, in keeping with these elements' high nuclear stability.

This concludes our introduction to Quantum Mechanics.
 
Summary 6: Does the universe expand?
The universe implodes and the past is all around us.  The phrase, ‘expanding universe’ is like the phrase, ‘sun-rise’... 
The Standard Model particles largely died out due to wars and famine. 
Only when the heavier particles were gone, the lightest two quarks formed protons. 
When the wars had ended, particles could (practically) live forever.  Non-lethal interactions became possible.  History became possible; Time began. 
When electrons connected to protons by means of EM, the universe became transparent and larger objects could be formed.  



 
Chapter 6.1 Christ amd Quantum Mechanics
- Is there some similarity here?  -
Christ the creative force—electromagnetism 
Electromagnetism is responsible for practically all the phenomena encountered in daily life, with the exception of gravity.  Ordinary matter takes its form as a result of intermolecular forces between individual molecules in matter.  Electromagnetism is also the force that holds electrons and protons together inside atoms, which are the building blocks of molecules.
According to Colossians 1:15-16 (see also John 1:1-5), Christ is the creative force:
15 He is the image of the invisible God, the firstborn over all creation.  16 For by Him all things were created that are in heaven and that are on earth, visible and invisible, whether thrones or dominions or principalities or powers.  All things were created through Him and for Him. [1] (NASB)
Christ the attracting force—gravity
Gravity curves space; and it always attracts, never repels.  Gravity is the only force to which all particles are subjected.  Gravitation, or gravity, is a natural phenomenon by which physical bodies attract with a force proportional to their mass.  Gravitation causes dispersed matter to coalesce, and coalesced matter to remain intact, thus accounting for the existence of the Earth, the Sun, and most of the macroscopic objects in the universe. 
In Psalm 148:1-14, the psalmist attributes all of creation to be under the dominion of Christ: heavens, angels, hosts, sun, moon, stars, waters, earth, sea creatures, hail, snow, clouds, stormy winds, mountains, hills, fruit trees, cedars, beasts, cattle, creeping things, flying fowl, kings, nations, princes, judges, young men, maidens, old men, and children… .  Hence, Christ is the universal attractor—like gravity.
Christ the binding force—strong force. 
The strong nuclear force binds quarks into nucleons and nucleons into nuclei.  Quarks and gluons are the only fundamental particles that carry non-vanishing color charge, and hence participate in strong interactions.  The strong force itself acts directly only upon elementary quark and gluon particles.  The strong force acts between quarks.  Unlike all other forces (electromagnetic, weak, and gravitational), the strong force does not diminish in strength with increasing distance.  The residual effect of the strong force is called the nuclear force.  The nuclear force acts between hadrons,  such as nucleons in atomic nuclei.
According to Colossians 1:17-18, Christ holds (or binds) all things together:
17 And He is before all things, and in Him all things hold together.  18 And He is the head of the body, the church, who is the beginning, the firstborn from the dead, that in all things He may have the preeminence. [1] (NASB)
Christ the changing force—the weak force
The weak nuclear force causes unstable particles and nuclei to decay.  The weak interaction is unique in a number of respects:
	It is the only interaction capable of changing the flavor of quarks (i.e. of changing one type of quark into another). 
	It is the only interaction that violates P- or parity-symmetry.  It is also the only one that violates CP-symmetry. 
	It is propagated by carrier particles that have significant masses (particles called gauge bosons), an unusual feature which is explained in the Standard Model by the Higgs mechanism.
Its most noticeable effect is due to its first unique feature: flavor changing.  A neutron, for example, is heavier than a proton (its sister nucleon), but it cannot decay into a proton without changing the flavor (type) of one of its two down quarks to up.  Neither the strong interaction nor electromagnetism permits flavor changing, so this must proceed by weak decay.  Without weak decay, quark properties such as strangeness and charm (associated with the quarks of the same name) would also be conserved across all interactions.  All mesons are unstable because of weak decay. [23] In the process known as ‘beta decay’, a down quark in the neutron can change into an up quark by emitting a virtual W⁻ boson that is then converted into an electron and an electron antineutrino. [23]
According to 2 Corinthians 5:16-18, Christ is the life-changing force. 
16 Therefore from now on we recognize no one according to the flesh; even though we have known Christ according to the flesh, yet now we know Him in this way no longer.  17 Therefore if anyone is in Christ, he is a new creature; the old things passed away; behold, new things have come.  18 Now all these things are from God, who reconciled us to Himself through Christ and gave us the ministry of reconciliation, [1] (NASB)
The rest of Scripture teaches that He is the only life-changing force—the only One that can bring about regeneration (e.g., John 14:5-7, Ephesians 2:4-10, 2 Timothy 1:8-12, Act 16:16-17, Romans 1:16, 1 Thessalonians 5:8-10,  Hebrews 5:8-10, Hebrews 9:23-28, 1 Peter 3:18-22)
Remember a similar table from Chapter 4?
 
Devine Force	Force (Natural Force)	Devine Function	Natural Function
Christ
Attracting Force (Gravity) 
In Psalm 148:1-14, the psalmist attributes all of creation to be under the dominion of Christ.
Gravity curves space.  It always attracts, never repels.  Gravity is the only force to which all particles are subjected.
Christ
Binding Force (Strong Force)
Christ holds all things together, Colossians 1:17-18.	The strong force binds quarks into nucleons and nucleons into nuclei.

Christ
Creating Force (Electromagnetism) 
Christ is the creative force, Colossians 1:15-16.	Electromagnetism binds electrons to the nucleus.  By doing so, electromagnetism allows all physical and chemical processes to happen.
Christ
Changing Force (Weak Force)
Christ is the only life-changing force, 2 Corinthians 5:16-18.	The weak force causes unstable particles and nuclei to decay/change.

 
Chaos Theory for Beginners
- It’s a Jungle Out There  -
The whole history of science has been the gradual realization that events do not happen in an arbitrary manner, but that they reflect a certain underlying order, which may or may not be divinely inspired.
- Stephen Hawking
Life finds a way
Remember Jurassic Park?  Handsome mathematician Doctor Ian Malcolm  (pictured here [6]) explaining to pretty Doctor Sattler why he thought it was unwise to have T-rexes and the likes romping around on an island?  John Hammond, the annoying owner, promised that nothing could go wrong and that all precautions were taken to ensure the safety of visitors.  Dr. Malcolm did not agree.  "Life finds a way," he said. 
Nature is highly complex, and the only prediction you can make is that she is unpredictable.  The amazing unpredictability of nature is what Chaos Theory looks at.  Why?  Because, nature is marvelous and mysterious instead of being boring and translucent.  Chaos Theory has managed to somewhat capture the beauty of the unpredictable and display it in the most awesome patterns.  Nature, when looked upon with the right kind of eyes, presents herself as one of the most fabulous works of art ever wrought. 
What is Chaos Theory?
Chaos Theory is a mathematical sub-discipline that studies complex systems.  Examples of the complex systems that Chaos Theory helped fathom are earth's weather system, the behavior of water boiling on a stove, migratory patterns of birds, or the spread of vegetation across a continent.  Chaos is everywhere, from nature's most intimate considerations to art of any kind.  Chaos-based graphics show up all the time, wherever flocks of little space ships sweep across the movie screen in highly complex ways, or awesome landscapes adorn the theater of some dramatic Oscar scene.  Do you remember Ace Ventura dangling from a rope over that abyss, trying to save the little raccoon?  Remember all those beautiful mountains in the background?  That was not a location shot.  That was computer-generated Chaos art.
Complex systems are systems that contain so much motion (so many elements that move) that computers are required to calculate all the various possibilities.  That is why Chaos Theory could not have emerged before the second half of the 20th century.
However, there is another reason that Chaos Theory was born so recently, and that is the ‘Quantum Mechanical Revolution’ and how it ended the ‘deterministic’ era.
Up to the Quantum Mechanical Revolution, people believed that things were directly caused by other things, that what went up had to come down, and that if only we could catch and tag every particle in the universe we could predict events from then on.  Entire governments and systems of belief were (and, sadly, are still) founded on these beliefs, and when Sigmund Freud invented psychoanalysis, he headed out from the idea that malfunctions in the mind are the results of traumas suffered in the past.  Regression would allow the patient to stroll down memory lane, pinpoint the sore spot and rub it away with Freud's healing techniques that were again based on linear cause and effect.
Chaos Theory however taught us that nature most often works in patterns, which are caused by the sum of many tiny pulses. 
Early History
An early proponent of chaos theory was Henri Poincaré.  In the 1880s, while studying the ‘three-body problem’, he found that there can be orbits which are nonperiodic, and yet not forever increasing nor approaching a fixed point. [24] In 1898, Jacques Hadamard published an influential study of the chaotic motion of a free particle gliding frictionlessly on a surface of constant negative curvature. [25] In the system studied, ‘Hadamard's billiards’, Hadamard was able to show that all trajectories are unstable in that all particle trajectories diverge exponentially from one another, with a positive Lyapunov exponent.
Mathematicians under the name of ergodic theory developed much of the earlier theory almost entirely.  G. D. Birkhoff [26], A. N. Kolmogorov [27], M. L. Cartwright and J. E. Littlewood [28], and Stephen Smale carried out later studies, also on the topic of nonlinear differential equations.  Except for Smale, physics directly inspired these studies: the three-body problem in the case of Birkhoff [29], turbulence and astronomical problems in the case of Kolmogorov, and radio engineering in the case of Cartwright and Littlewood.  Although chaotic planetary motion had not been observed, experimentalists had encountered turbulence in fluid motion and nonperiodic oscillation in radio circuits without the benefit of a theory to explain what they were seeing.
Despite initial insights in the first half of the twentieth century, Chaos theory became formalized as such only after mid-century, when it first became evident for some scientists that linear theory, the prevailing system theory at that time, simply could not explain the observed behavior of certain experiments like that of the logistic map.  What mathematicians had beforehand excluded as measure imprecision and simple ‘noise’, chaos theories now considered as a full component of the studied systems.
The main catalyst for the development of chaos theory was the electronic computer.  Much of the mathematics of chaos theory involves the repeated iteration of simple mathematical formulas, which would be impractical to do by hand.  Electronic computers made these repeated calculations practical, while figures and images made it possible to visualize these systems.
How Chaos Theory was born and why
It all started to dawn on people when in 1960 a man named Edward Lorenz  (pictured here [6]) created a weather-model on his computer at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology.  Lorentz’ weather model consisted of an extensive array of complex formulas that kicked numbers around like an old pigskin.  Clouds rose and winds blew, heat scourged or cold came creeping up the breeches.	 
Colleagues and students marveled over the machine because it never seemed to repeat a sequence; it was really quite like the real weather.  Some even hoped that Lorentz had built the ultimate weather-predictor and if one chose the input parameters identical to those of the real weather howling outside the Maclaurin Building, it could mimic earth's atmosphere and would be a precise prophet.
Then one day Lorentz decided to cheat a little bit.  A while earlier, he had let the program run on certain parameters to generate a certain weather pattern and he wanted to take a better look at the outcome.  Instead of letting the program run from the initial settings and calculate the outcome, Lorentz decided to start half way down the sequence by inputting the values that the computer had come up with during the earlier run. 
The computer that Lorentz was working with calculated the various parameters with an accuracy of six decimals; but the printout gave these numbers with a three decimal accuracy.  So, instead of inputting certain numbers (like wind, temperature and stuff like that) as accurate as the computer had them, Lorentz settled for approximations; 5.123456 became 5.123 (for instance).  And that puny little inaccuracy appeared to amplify and cause the entire system to swing out of whack.
 
Exactly how important is all this?  Well, in the case of weather systems, it is very important.  Weather is the total behavior of all the molecules that make up earth's atmosphere; and in the previous chapters, we have established that a tiny particle cannot be accurately pinpointed, due to the Uncertainty Principle!  Moreover, this is the sole reason why weather forecasts begin to be bogus around a day or two into the future.  We cannot get an accurate fix on the present situation, just a mere approximation, and so our ideas about the weather are doomed to fall into misalignment in a matter of hours, and completely into the nebulas of fantasy within days.  Nature will not let herself be predicted. 
Principle (7):
The Uncertainty Principle prohibits accuracy.  Therefore, the initial situation of a complex system cannot be accurately determined, and the evolution of a complex system cannot be accurately predicted.
Attractors
Complex systems often appear too chaotic to recognize a pattern with the naked eye.  Nevertheless, by using certain techniques, large arrays of parameters may be abbreviated into one point in a graph.  In the little rain-or-sunshine graph above, every point represents a complete condition with wind speed, rain fall, air temperature, etc., but by processing these numbers in a certain way they can be represented by one point.  Stacking moment upon moment reveals the ‘little graph’ and offers us some insight in the development of a weather system.
The first Chaos Theorists began to discover that complex systems often seem to run through some kind of cycle, even though situations are rarely exactly duplicated and repeated.  Plotting many systems in simple graphs revealed that often there seems to be some kind of situation that the system tries to achieve, equilibrium of some sort.  For instance, imagine a city of 10,000 people.  In order to accommodate these people, the city will spawn one supermarket, two swimming pools, a library and three churches.  For argument's sake, we will assume that this setup pleases everybody and achieves equilibrium.  But then, the Ben & Jerry's company decides to open an ice cream plant on the outskirts of the town, opening jobs for 10,000 more people.  The town expands rapidly to accommodate 20,000 people; the town adds one supermarket, two swimming pools, one library and three churches, and maintain the equilibrium.  That equilibrium is called an Attractor. 
Now imagine that instead of adding 10,000 people to the original 10,000, 3,000 people move away from the city and 7,000 remain.  The bosses of the supermarket chain calculate that a supermarket can only exist when it has 8,000 regular customers.  So after a while, they shut the store down and the people of the city are left without groceries.  Demand rises and some other company decides to build a supermarket, hoping that a new supermarket will attract new people.  And it does.  But many were already in the process of moving and a new supermarket will not change their plans.
The company keeps the store running for a year and then concludes that there are not enough customers and shut it down again.  People move away.  Demand rises.  Someone else opens a supermarket.  People move in but not enough.  Store closes again.  And so on. 
This awful situation is also some kind of equilibrium, but a dynamic one.  A dynamic kind-of-equilibrium is called a Strange Attractor.  The difference between an Attractor and a Strange Attractor is that an Attractor represents a state to which a system finally settles, while a Strange Attractor represents some kind of trajectory upon which a system runs from situation to situation without ever settling down.
The discovery of Attractors was exciting and explained a lot, but the most awesome phenomenon Chaos Theory discovered was a crazy little thing called Self-Similarity.  Unveiling Self-Similarity allowed people a glimpse of the magical mechanisms that shape our world, and perhaps even ourselves... 
And before you turn to the next page, think about this: A snowflake is an object composed of water molecules.  These molecules do not have a common nerve system, DNA or a chief molecule that calls the shots.  How do these molecules know where to go and hang in order to form a six-pointed star?  And where do they get the audacity to form a different one every time?  How does one molecule in one leg of the flake know which private design the rest of the gang is cruising for, in other legs of the flake, for the tiny molecule a million miles away? 

Summary 7: Chaos Theory for Beginners
Chaos Theory is a mathematical sub-discipline that studies complex systems.
Complex systems are systems that contain so much motion (so many elements that move) that computers are required to calculate all the various possibilities.
Chaos Theory taught us that nature most often works in patterns, which are caused by the sum of many tiny pulses. 
Nature will not let herself be predicted. 
Complex systems often seem to run through some kind of cycle, even though situations are rarely exactly duplicated and repeated.
Unveiling Self-Similarity allowed people a glimpse of the magical mechanisms that shape our world.

 
Self-Similarity
- Variety Makes All the Difference -
It is no small honour that God for our sake has so magnificently adorned the world, in order that we may not only be spectators of this beauteous theatre, but also enjoy the multiplied abundance and variety of good things which are presented to us in it.
-John Calvin
So, how does nature do it?
How does nature direct molecules into snowflakes, or crystals or any other regular form?  Chaos Theory has an answer: Self-Similarity, a fundamental principle that allows building blocks to mimic their own shape in the building they make.
Remember this principle, from chapter 2?
Principle (2b)
A large number of particles will display a pattern that is near equal to the initial possibilities of a single particle.
A similar thing is going on here.  A large number of elements may form a shape that is derived from the shape of one element.  And because no element can be coerced to follow a certain path, no large number of elements will display the exact same pattern as another group.  Patterns caused by large numbers of elements are alike but never the same.  Hence, all snowflakes look alike but no two are identical.
Self-similarity is a really big deal.  It occurs all over nature and many have argued that self-similarity is one of the key natural principles that shape our world the way it is.  Self-similarity has been observed in all fields of research: physics, but also biology and even psychology and sociology.  It also happens all over Scripture, has been studied extensively, and is most often referred to as ‘type-Theology’.  In the Book of Exodus for instance, Moses constructs the Tabernacle according to heavenly patterns he observed (Ex. 25:40, Heb. 8:5), making the tabernacle a self-similarity of something that exists on a different level of complexity, namely heaven. 
No wonder that it is written:
I will open my mouth in parables, I will utter things hidden since the creation of the world. [30] 
- Matt. 13:35 (NIV-UK)
Principle (8a)
Self-similarity is the repetition of a shape, form or behavior on different levels of complexity.  Not as an identical copy, but as a variation of the same basic shape.
And how do mathematicians do it?
A fractal is an image that displays self-similarity.  One of the first works of Fractal Art was made in 1904 by a Swedish mathematician named Helge von Koch (pictured below [6]), and his piece was the so-called ‘Koch Snow Flake’.  He took a triangle and added a similar but smaller triangle to each of the sides of the first one.  Then he added smaller triangles to the sides of the second ones, again to the sides of the third ones, and so on ad infinitum. 
 Every textbook reporting on the Koch Snow Flake will demand that if indeed we continue this process ad infinitum we will add length to the outline ad infinitum, hence producing an infinitely long line.  And yes, theoretically this is true.  But with every step, the added triangle gets smaller and smaller, and in the real world, there is no such thing as infinitely small.  After a great many steps, the sides of the smallest triangle will be one quantum long, and no smaller triangle can be added.
That is more important than it seems.  The big difference between God's snowflakes and Koch's snowflakes is that God's are all different, while Koch's are all the same.  Koch's Snow Flake is sterile while with God's flakes, variety makes all the difference.  This is why no tree is alike, no mountain is alike, and no human is alike.  But there is more…
Koch's tiniest triangles are identical to the big triangle, but way down the line, this concoction proves to be an impossible structure.  It is a un-fractal since the tiniest triangles will lose their form and fuzz up.  A sleek triangle like that will only occur in the minds of Koch and perhaps Plato, but not in nature.  Nature produces snowflakes that are never the same because the large-scale phenomenon does not mimic the shape of the small-scale phenomenon, but the behavior: unpredictability, randomness and sovereignty.  And, Math has no way of generating randomness. 
Nature does produce, however, affine  self-similarity as shown in the fern depicted to the right. 
Randomness
Generating random numbers is somewhat of a sport among mathematicians.  Because, how does one program randomness?  There is no way!  Therefore, they cheat.  They take some kind of infinite number sequence (like the number pi—π) and tell a computer to select decimals at certain intervals (like every fourth digit, or seventh, or whatever).  Π is a number without inner structure and its digits are random (for as far as we know now), so out comes a random number sequence.  But this is not real randomness because any other smart computer could analyze the result and blow the whistle: This is not random-random, this is π-random.  And as the secret is out, can predict the rest of the pseudo-random sequence.  If the second computer divides every outcome of the first by the way it generates the pseudo-random sequence, it would spew out one every cycle.  That violates the prime definition of randomness, and the sequence is not random.  True randomness cannot be divided by something other than itself.
Besides that, the decimals of the number π go on forever.  That means that if we try to express the relationship between diameter and circumference of a circle in numbers we need infinite detail to stay truthful.  But infinite detail does not exist, and so we must yield to the rather shocking conclusion that the before mentioned relationship cannot be expressed in numbers, and that π is not a number at all!
The same goes for that other famous ‘number’ e, and all so-called transcendental numbers (numbers that go on forever after the dot; in other words, numbers that represent infinite detail).  And to make matters worse… 
It may seem a bit paradoxical but since mathematics cannot release its detailed accuracy; it loses connection with the real world around quantum level.
Principle (8b):
Since reality is fuzzy, accuracy is approximation.

Self-Similarity and Scripture
We mentioned already the concept of type-theology.  For instance, Hebrews 8:1-5 says:
1 Now this is the main point of the things we are saying: We have such a High Priest, who is seated at the right hand of the throne of the Majesty in the heavens, 2 a Minister of the sanctuary and of the true tabernacle which the Lord erected, and not man.  3 For every high priest is appointed to offer both gifts and sacrifices.  Therefore it is necessary that this One also have something to offer.  4 For if He were on earth, He would not be a priest, since there are priests who offer the gifts according to the law; 5 who serve the copy and shadow of the heavenly things, as Moses was divinely instructed when he was about to make the tabernacle.  For He said, “See that you make all things according to the pattern shown you on the mountain.” [31] (NKJV)
This passage actually shows two different self-similar heavenly-earthly concepts: high priests and tabernacles.  The Jewish high priests (and their entire sacrificial system) are self-similar to the heavenly High Priest—Christ.  The earthly tabernacle where the Jews worshiped and God’s manifestation resided is self-similar to God’s heavenly tabernacle where He sovereignly sits.
 Other Self-Similarities in Scripture
Earth
Heaven	Concept
Adam
Christ
Adam is the first man through which sin entered the world—Christ is the firstborn of Creation and the life giving spirit through which sin is erased (Romans 5:12, 1 Cor. 15:45, 1 John 2:12)

Old earth
New Earth
The old earth is in a fallen condition of bondage to sin—the new earth is a place where righteousness dwells (2 Peter 3:13)
Jerusalem
New Jerusalem
God’s holy city on earth – God’s eternal holy city (Revelation 21:2)

Melchizedek
Christ
Melchizedek, who was both king of Salem and a priest of God—at the same time (Genesis 14:18-20)—was a type of Christ.  Jesus, at his ascension, began to reign on David’s throne and to simultaneously function as our high priest (cf. Psalm 110:4; Zechariah 6:12, 13; Hebrews 5:5-10; 6:20; 7:1-17).
Joshua
Jesus
Joshua, whose name in  the Greek translation of the Hebrew Old Testament is ‘Jesus’ now leads the people of Israel into the Promised Land.  Joshua foreshadows Jesus Christ as Joshua's name and work in this book of the Bible demonstrates.
Marriage (Husband & Wife)	Marriage (Christ & Church)	The human marriage is a small-scale self-similarity of the future perfected relation between Creator and creation (Eph. 5:22-33)
Noahic flood
Baptism
Baptism in Christ is the prototype of the great flood.  This word, as used in the New Testament, denotes ‘that which corresponds to’ the type; it is the reality which fulfills the prophetic picture (1 Pet. 3:18-21)
Jewish Tabernacle
Heavenly Tabernacle
God told Moses to build a tabernacle after the pattern He would show him.  (Exodus 25:40; Hebrews 8:4-5; 9:8-10)

Brazen Serpent	Exalted Christ
The brazen serpent, lifted up in the wilderness, through which the people found physical healing (Numbers 21:8) was a type of the lifted-up Christ (John 3:14; 12:32), through whom spiritual healing comes (Isaiah 53:5).

Manna in the Desert	Bread of Life
The manna from heaven in the wilderness (Exodus 16:14-16) was a type of that spiritual bread who came down from heaven to nourish humanity (John 6:32-33).

Summary 8: Self-Similarity.
Self-similarity is a structure repeated on a different level of complexity or at a different scale. 
Numbers cannot fully represent reality because (1) they are too accurate, and (2) they cannot mimic the randomness that comes from the freedom that is the most fundamental principle of nature. 
The Bible is full of self-similarities—types and prototypes.


 
ChApter 8.1 Who framed the number sequence?
- Jessica Rabbit explains -
No other question has ever moved so profoundly the spirit of man; no other idea has so fruitfully stimulated his intellect; yet no other concept stands in greater need of clarification than that of the infinite. 
-David Hilbert
A difficult theorem can like a...symphony.  It's very erotic.
- Professor Gerald Lambeau on combinatorics
The power of Jessica Rabbit
As verified by Professor Lambeau in Good Will Hunting , there is something deeply sensual about the number sequence (1, 2, 3, 4, 5... etc.).  There is also something deeply sensual about Jessica Rabbit.  So... perhaps the two have something in common. 
Psychology will assure us that Jessica Rabbit's slightly disproportionate features and lurid posture represents that which men find attractive in women, so even though Jessica is not a woman but a collection of pixels, our readily deceived minds gladly respond as if it were.
That's all very nice, you say, but what does this have to do with the number sequence?  Jessica Rabbit  is not real, but the number sequence is!  Well, if Jessica Rabbit is not real, how can she provoke a real response?  Something that is not there cannot cause a real effect.  The question is thus not if Jessica is real, but what it is about Jessica that allows her to transcend out of the fictional realm from which she sprang, into the realm of very real emotional responses. 
Someone drew Jessica up and made her an amplified representation of that which he noticed in his model, so that the audience may watch her have all kinds of adventures as if she were real enough to have them.  She moves and grooves just like a real woman.  And we do not really mind that Jessica is not real.  We are, and so is our fascination with her.  We watch a woman when we watch Jessica Rabbit.
A girl like Jessica Rabbit
It all started with Pythagoras , who is not only celebrated for discovering that the hypotenuse is equal to the square root of the sum of the squares of the two other sides of a triangle, but also for founding the religion of the Pythagoreans—with at the heart the belief that the universe can be represented by numbers.  Like this:
 
Phenomenon	Model
Cybill Shepherd 
Jessica Rabbit

The Universe
Numbers

After all, there is an ‘amount’ of anything, and only so many ways things can relate to each other.  The number sequence, and the mathematics—the study of patterns—that was derived from the number sequence, consider the properties of numbers before they are connected to a unit.  The properties of a number (like 6) remain after it is connected to a unit (like apples or star ships or jokes).  Since 6 is 2 plus 4, 6 apples is 2 apples plus 4 apples, 6 star ships is 2 star ships plus 4 star ships, and 6 jokes is 2 jokes plus 4 jokes.  Numbers can be studied without a practical application.  In a way, a lot like Jessica's sensuality can be studied without sticking this sensuality to an actual image.
That has a very peculiar effect.  Most of us have seen a car.  Most of us have seen a hundred cars parked on a lot.  But not many of us have seen a million cars at once.  Everybody has seen an apple.  But not many of us have seen a billion apples.  Not many of us have seen a billion of anything—except perhaps atoms.  When we look up to the stars, we can see billions and billions of particles at once, but still this is only a minute, almost negligible fraction of the amount of particles that exist.
It seems that big numbers are less likely to have a practical application; but mathematics considers numbers before their application.  That means that big numbers are as real and proper as littler numbers.  To math, 2 is as downright normal as 2,000,000,000,000,000, or an even larger number such as the googol , which is 10100 (and which is also the entropy of the total universe, hence the name of the famous search engine), or the googolplex, which is 10googol (as well as the nickname of the Google buildings—funny!).  And it goes on.  How about googolplexgoogolplex!  Or googolplex raised to the power of googolplex raised to the power of googolplex raised to the power of googolplex...!  Wow, a number is never so large that it cannot be even larger; never so large that 1 cannot be added to it, or that it cannot be multiplied by 2 or 100 or by itself, or by the square of itself.
In other words, the number sequence runs ad infinitum, and the numbers that have bearing on reality are an infinitesimal small part of the whole sequence.  But even though the number sequence runs towards infinity, infinity is not a point on the number sequence.  After all, from every point on the number sequence (that means every number) we can go to a larger number, or a smaller one.  Not with infinity.  Two times infinity is still infinity.  Infinity divided by 2 is still infinity.  In fact, infinity divided by any point on the number sequence, from 1 to googolplex raised to the power of googolplex raised to ... etc., will still yield infinity.  That means that infinity is equally far removed from any point on the number sequence: infinitely far!
"Good", you say, because infinity does not occur in nature.  If we just consider the first big chunk of the number sequence, we are in the clear and numbers may represent the universe.  Sorry, no cigar...
The number 2 can only exist when 1 exists.  Just as helium can only exist when hydrogen exists, all numbers are tied to each other.  All numbers can only exist when all other numbers exist; every number derives its existence from the entire number sequence.  The number sequence is infinite, and so there are traces of infinity in every number... 
Defining numbers
The number sequence works because of some very rigid rules.  Suppose there was some hidden wormhole that could take us from, say, 4 to a number far up the slope of the sequence that has the same properties of 4.  That would cause the entire sequence to collapse.  Every number must have an individual spot, where only that number may live.  Math studies patterns, including patterns in the number sequence, and over the millennia, it has become evident that all numbers are somehow connected to all other numbers, like the cells of a large organism.  Cells like that must have a common ground that makes them relate so vigorously.  What is the common ground of numbers?  The very heart of the number sequence?  It is the fact that they are all segments of an infinite system.  Infinity is the fundamental identity of the sequence, and the elements that make it up.
In order for the number sequence to work, the following must be true for every number ‘n’: whatever is smaller than n is not equal to n, and whatever is larger than n is also not equal to n. Numbers smaller than n are any numbers from zero to n, but numbers larger than n are any numbers from n to infinity!  That means that in the definition of every number the mystery of infinity is lurking.  There is infinity in every number, and since infinity does not occur in nature; numbers the way we know them do not apply to nature.  And the reason that we see 2 apples in a basket, 5 birds in the sky, and 12 cars parked in the lot is that Jessica's voluptuary bouquet of pixels is so attractive that we forgive and forget that she is not really real.  We love her.  We would not know how to live without her.  And to rescue her, we dismiss the definition of numbers that identifies the number as profiling against the entire sequence, and seek to define a number by means of its nearest neighbors.
When we say 2, we mean exactly 2, not 2.00001 or 2.0000000000000001 or 2 with a novemdecillion zeroes and then a 1.  When we say 2, we mean a 2 with an infinite amount of zeroes following it.  Any amount of zeroes that is not infinite would allow a 1 to be added to it, making the 2 not exactly so.  Just like the number π needs infinite detail to be fully described by numbers, so does any number.  Even round numbers.  Every number.
There is something very unreal about numbers; but there is also something very real about them.  Numbers help us to stylize reality into a tangible shape that we can push, punch, and move around.  Numbers help us to define what needs to be debated, they help us built the world we live in.  Although they work on a principle that depends on something that they themselves cannot reach or fathom, they imitate the universe so well that a glimpse of that which they cannot contain shines dimly from their ranks.  It has been reported that the randomness that lies at the bottom of all reality actually managed to creep into the number sequence, as Jessica’s very real sensuality has crept into her flat and frozen pose.  And as a rose by any other name would smell as sweet; the number sequence is saturated with a perfume carrying the fragrance of nature, real nature, like a heart beating in Jessica’s paper chest and pumping paper blood to her paper promontories.

 
Chapter 8.2.  There's Something About the Number Sequence
- Ulam’s Rose or Prime Number Spiral -
 “Not everything that counts can be counted, and not everything that can be counted counts."
-Albert Einstein
Prime Numbers (2, 3, 5, 7, 11, 13, 17,...)
There are many kinds of numbers and all different kinds come down to the same thing: they are amounts of something before the something is 'added'.  In a weird and far sought way, all numbers are equal, but some numbers are more equal than others are.  Those are the prime numbers, and primes are of royalty.	 
Prime numbers are numbers that can only be divided by themselves and by one, which in both cases comes down to not dividing at all.
Primes are diamond numbers.  They are rock hard and cannot be tampered with.  Primes are the atoms of the number sequence and all other numbers are built from primes—that is why we call all other numbers composite numbers.  Composite numbers are molecules.  Primes are ‘atoms’.
The number sequence is arranged so that some numbers (like 4) are a lot smaller than some atoms, like lawrencium with atomic number 103.  Nature obviously does not work like that, although some molecules (like H2O) are a lot smaller than some atoms (like uranium).  Still, a molecule-atom ratio like 4 / 2^1398269-1 does not occur in nature, because nature is not based on an infinite string of atoms.  The number sequence is.  In fact, it is provable that between a certain number N and that same number times two (2N), at least one prime number has to exist. 
Prime numbers have fascinated mathematicians for as long as the discovery of primes in the context of the number sequence.  And the big question soon became, why do prime numbers occur at such inconsistent intervals?  Could there be one single formula that predicts all prime numbers, or something that can be said that is true for all prime numbers?  Is there any kind of regularity in the appearance of primes?
No one could supply the world with an answer and primes where believed to occur randomly.  And that is a very big word because randomness is deeply akin to the freedom upon which nature is based.  True randomness cannot be predicted—as we have seen—because there is no deterministic force behind it.  With her prime numbers, the number sequence seemed to prove that numbers could indeed be used to express randomness, hence to describe nature, hence cover the Truth.  And the excitement about primes flared up even more in the wake of boredom of a devoted 20th century math-magician named Stanislaw Ulam. 
 Stan the Man.
Stanislaw Ulam  (pictured here [6]) was attending some boring meeting, and to divert himself somewhat he began to scribble on a piece of paper.  If anything other than numbers had been his forte he might have doodled flowers and petals or little faces and aliens descending from the sky, but Stan's mind was a number mind and Stan drew numbers.  He put down the number 1 as the bright shining center of a universe of numbers that ‘Big Banged’ outwardly in a spiral:
 
73	74	75	76	77	78	79	80	81
72	43	44	45	46	47	48	49	50
71	42	21	22	23	24	25	26	51
70	41	20	7	8	9	10	27	52
69	40	19	6	1	2	11	28	53
68	39	18	5	4	3	12	29	54
67	38	17	16	15	14	13	30	55
66	37	36	35	34	33	32	31	56
65	64	63	62	61	60	59	58	57


Much to his amazement, the prime numbers appeared to gravitate towards diagonal lines emanating from the central 1.  Yet there was no apparent rule that forced all prime numbers upon a diagonal line like that.  Most of them sat on or near a diagonal, but some obviously did not.  Ulam ran home and expanded the spiral to cover a much larger portion of the number sequence.  The strange pattern persisted.  Primes had a tendency to occur in clusters and all clusters tended to make a beautiful image that could not be predicted. 
Look at the picture in the upper right corner of page 83.  It looks like something out of nature but in fact, it is the prime numbers from 1 to 262,144.  Like water molecules huddle together to make a snowflake according to some basic design, prime numbers huddle together to make the Ulam Rose.
Ulam constructed the spiral by writing down a regular rectangular grid of numbers, starting with 1 at the center, and spiraling out:
 
He then circled all of the prime numbers and he got the following picture:
 
To his surprise, the circled numbers tended to line up along diagonal lines.  The image below is a 200×200 Ulam spiral, where primes are black.  Diagonal lines are clearly visible, confirming the pattern.  Horizontal and vertical lines, while less prominent, are also evident.
 
The arithmophilic  world responded in awe.  There is true, unpredictable randomness in the number sequence!  Numbers are as beautiful as nature!  And up to this day, every book on popular mathematics uses the word random in direct relation to prime number distribution.
Yeah, well, if we are willing to sacrifice that which we think we see in order to investigate what is there, we may put our awe to rest. 

 
Chapter 8.3.  Ulam Rose?  Get a Grip!
- Rose?  What Rose? -
It is still an unending source of surprise for me how a few scribbles on a blackboard or on a piece of paper can change the course of human affairs. 
-Stanislaw Ulam
There are two facts about the distribution of prime numbers of which I hope to convince you so overwhelmingly that they will be permanently engraved in your hearts.  The first is that, despite their simple definition and role as the building blocks of the natural numbers, the prime numbers grow like weeds among the natural numbers, seeming to obey no other law than that of chance, and nobody can predict where the next one will sprout.  The second fact is even more astonishing, for it states just the opposite: that the prime numbers exhibit stunning regularity, that there are laws governing their behavior, and that they obey these laws with almost military precision.
-Don Zaier
A rose by any other name...
Okay people!  This has been going on too long.  Let's get real about the Ulam Prime conundrum.  First, let's wonder what exactly the Ulam Spiral is.  Well, to start with, the Ulam Spiral is not a spiral but isolated segments of the number sequence that get larger 8 numbers per segment:
 Number segment	 Numbers a → b	 Amount of numbers
heart	1	1
1	2 → 9	1×8
2	10 → 25	2×8
3	26 → 50	3×8
4	51 → 83	 4×8
etc.	etc.	etc.
Polignac's Conjecture  (Arithmetic Progressions)
Why would we want to write down the number sequence in segments that get 8 numbers larger every time?  Why not write it down in segments of 6 that stay 6?  Behold, we can do this with the twin prime conjecture.  It is conjectured that there are infinitely many twin primes, pairs of primes with difference 2 (twin prime conjecture), beginning after 2 and 3.
As you can see, all primes after 3 are neatly sorted in two columns.  There is never one out—although some primes do not have a twin prime.  All primes humankind is ever going to find are in one of these two columns: 6a+1 or 6a-1 (a being any number).
 2	 3	 .	 5	 .	 7
 .	 	 .	 11	 .	 13
 .	 .	 .	 17	 .	 
9
 .	 .	 .	 23	 .	 *
 .	 .	 .	 29	 .	 31
 .	
.	 .	 *	 .	 37
 .	 .	 .	 41	 .	 43
 .	 .	 .	 47	
.	 
 	 	 .	 53	 .	 *

.	 .	 .	 59	 .	 61
 .	 .	 .	 *	 .	 67
 .	 .	 .	 71	 .	 73
 .	 .	 .	 etc.	 .	 etc.
		Most of the time, prime numbers find themselves adrift in an expanding ocean of composites, but sometimes one of those 6a+ "or "-1 stay intact (like 41-43 or 71-73).  Then they form a so-called prime-twin.  Many pop-math books will try to make you believe that no one knows why prime-twins exist, but now you know better.
But why are some numbers in the two pillars crossed out and turned into a little star?  It is when a so-called isofactor crosses them out.  Do yourself a favor.  Copy this page and then write in the ‘twin prime matrix’ or ‘two-column pillar’ all numbers that are divisible by 5.  You will find that they too are neatly lined up, except that the line is not vertical but diagonal.
Imagine rolling up the two-column pillar to a tube, so that the number sequence becomes a spiral swirling down that tube.  You will find that all isofactors (lines that connect all numbers divisible by some other number) are spirals too, and swirl along the same tube. 
A rose without thorns
Let's do another clever trick.  Let's pretend that the two prime columns of the of the two-column pillar are not interrupted by isofactor victims, but perfectly solid with prime numbers.  We can do that because for as long as the number sequence runs, it is possible that prime numbers occur in the same rhythmic cadence, namely, 'number, number, number, possible-prime' number, possible-prime’.  Like so (‘P’ is a possible prime):
1 2 3 * P * P * * * P * P * * * P * P * * * P * P * * * P * P
It is the basic, underlying pattern of the number sequence.  Now watch what happens if we coil this basic pattern of the number sequence up like Ulam did:
 .	 P	 .	 .	 .	 P	 .	 P	 .	 .	 .	 P	 .	 P	 .	 .	 .	 P	 .	 P	 .	 .	 .	 P	 .
 P	 .	 .	 .	 P	 .	 P	 .	 .	 .	 P	 .	 P	 .	 .	 .	 P	 .	 P	 .	 .	 .	 P	 .	 P
 .	 P	 .	 P	 .	 .	 .	 P	 .	 P	 .	 .	 .	 P	 .	 P	 .	 .	 .	 P	 .	 P	 .	 .	 .
 .	 .	 P	 .	 P	 .	 .	 .	 P	 .	 P	 .	 .	 .	 P	 .	 P	 .	 .	 .	 P	 .	 P	 .	 .
 .	 P	 .	 P	 .	 .	 .	 P	 .	 P	 .	 .	 .	 P	 .	 P	 .	 .	 .	 P	 .	 P	 .	 P	 .
 P	 .	 .	 .	 P	 .	 P	 .	 .	 .	 P	 .	 P	 .	 .	 .	 P	 .	 P	 .	 .	 .	 .	 .	 P
 .	 .	 .	 .	 .	 P	 .	 P	 .	 .	 .	 P	 .	 P	 .	 .	 .	 P	 .	 P	 .	 .	 .	 P	 .
 P	 .	 P	 .	 P	 .	 P	 .	 .	 .	 P	 .	 P	 .	 .	 .	 P	 .	 P	 .	 P	 .	 P	 .	 P
 .	 P	 .	 P	 .	 .	 .	 P	 .	 P	 .	 .	 .	 P	 .	 P	 .	 .	 .	 .	 .	 P	 .	 .	 .
 .	 .	 P	 .	 .	 .	 .	 .	 P	 P	 .	 .	 .	 P	 .	 P	 .	 .	 .	 .	 P	 .	 P	 .	 .
 .	 P	 .	 P	 .	 P	 .	 P	 .	 .	 .	 .	 P	 .	 P	 .	 .	 P	 .	 P	 .	 P	 .	 P	 .
 P	 .	 .	 .	 P	 .	 P	 .	 .	 P	 .	 P	 .	 .	 .	 .	 .	 .	 P	 .	 .	 .	 .	 .	 P
 .	 .	 .	 .	 .	 P	 .	 .	 .	 .	 P	 .	 1	 2	 P	 .	 P	 P	 .	 P	 .	 .	 .	 P	 .
 P	 .	 P	 .	 P	 .	 P	 .	 P	 .	 .	 P	 .	 3	 .	 P	 .	 .	 P	 .	 P	 .	 P	 .	 P
 .	 P	 .	 P	 .	 .	 .	 P	 .	 .	 P	 .	 .	 .	 P	 .	 P	 .	 .	 .	 .	 P	 .	 .	 .
 .	 .	 P	 .	 .	 .	 .	 .	 P	 P	 .	 P	 .	 .	 .	 P	 .	 .	 .	 .	 P	 .	 P	 .	 .
 .	 P	 .	 P	 .	 P	 .	 P	 .	 .	 .	 P	 .	 P	 .	 .	 .	 P	 .	 P	 .	 P	 .	 P	 .
 P	 .	 .	 .	 P	 .	 P	 .	 .	 .	 P	 .	 P	 .	 .	 .	 P	 .	 P	 .	 .	 .	 .	 .	 P
 .	 .	 .	 .	 .	 P	 .	 P	 .	 .	 .	 P	 .	 P	 .	 .	 .	 P	 .	 P	 .	 .	 .	 P	 .
 P	 .	 P	 .	 P	 .	 .	 .	 P	 .	 P	 .	 .	 .	 P	 .	 P	 .	 .	 .	 P	 .	 P	 .	 P
 .	 P	 .	 P	 .	 .	 .	 P	 .	 P	 .	 .	 .	 P	 .	 P	 .	 .	 .	 P	 .	 P	 .	 .	 .
 .	 .	 P	 .	 P	 .	 .	 .	 P	 .	 P	 .	 .	 .	 P	 .	 P	 .	 .	 .	 P	 .	 P	 .	 .
 .	 P	 .	 .	 .	 P	 .	 P	 .	 .	 .	 P	 .	 P	 .	 .	 .	 P	 .	 P	 .	 .	 .	 P	 .
 P	 .	 .	 .	 P	 .	 P	 .	 .	 .	 P	 .	 P	 .	 .	 .	 P	 .	 P	 .	 .	 .	 P	 .	 P
 .	 P	 .	 .	 .	 P	 .	 P	 .	 .	 .	 P	 .	 P	 .	 .	 .	 P	 .	 P	 .	 .	 .	 P	 .

Now realize that although the prime number density thins out gradually, they still appear at more or less regular intervals, et voila: you have yourself a ‘magical hoax’.
The number sequence cycles.  The most basic cycle is obviously the odd-even-odd-even cycle, which lasts 2 numbers and repeats ad infinitum.  All prime numbers (except 2) occur in the odd bunch.  Write down all numbers in a two-column pillar, and you will see that all prime numbers are in the same column.
The next cycle is the one we displayed above, which lasts 6 numbers, and repeats ad infinitum.  All prime numbers after 3 occur in the fourth or sixth column.
The next cycle is 2×3×5=30 long and repeats forever; all primes occur in a limited number of columns.  Next comes 2×3×5×7, after that 2×3×5×7×11, then 2×3×5×7×11×13, and so on until the cows come home.
Numbers: timeless, spaceless and awesome 
Most of us like to believe that the number sequence begins with 1 and then produces 2 and then goes on onto infinity, and also that the number sequence is a natural thing, which was created along with everything else in the Beginning when God created the heavens and the earth.  Well, no.  The number sequence is a human invention (see box below) and came to be at once and complete when Euclid wrote down its few driving axioms.
Just remember that the number sequence does not depend on time and when its axioms were established, the whole sequence burst forth in all its splendor and utter predictability:
There are many ways to represent the number sequence, but we will never be able to convey it fully in any way.  The number sequence is infinite and works only when infinity is observed.  Some beautiful and stunning infinite series converge upon some finite value.  Mind boggling and fascinating, these series illustrate that infinity comes in different sizes, and this glorious phenomenon defies any definition of it.  Infinity lives in the number sequence like a mechanical soul, utterly incomprehensible and always fleeting the limitations posed by numbers, and many have noted that math is rather an art-form than a science.  Maybe it is both and math too gives us another reason to be awed about the things we cannot fathom. 
The Invention of Numbers
In the process of inventing numbers, mathematicians abandoned the traditional notion of number that they had inherited from the mathematics of ancient Greece.  For what the ancient Greeks meant by “number” (“arithmos”) is what we now mean by “finite set”.
On their conception of number, a number (arithmos) is a “finite plurality composed of units”, where a ‘unit’ is whatever counts as one thing in the plurality that is the number.
Numbers in this ancient sense are always numbers of, a number of planets or of stars: Mercury, Venus, and Mars, together compose a number, a three, of planets, of which three they are the units; Betelgeuse, Rigel, Mizar, and Aldeberan together compose a number, a four, of stars, of which four they are the units; and so on.
Thus what we now call ‘numbers’ (e.g., three, sixty-seven) are, not what the Greek regarded as numbers—arithmoi—but as kinds of number.  Number words and numerals (“three”, 67) are, from the traditional standpoint, not names of ‘abstract objects’ of a peculiar sort (as they are for us), but species names or concept words, like ‘horse’ or ‘dog’.  Just as a horse or a dog is an animal of a certain kind, so a three or a sixty-seven is a number (arithmos, finite set) of a certain kind.
It follows that, in conformity with the original notion of number, instead of the natural numbers
0, 1, 2, · · ·, 67, 68, · · ·
we should speak of
the zero, ones, twos, · · ·, sixty-sevens, sixty-eights, · · ·
or, in the singular,
the zero, a one, a two, · · ·, a sixty-seven, a sixty-eight, · · ·
 
 
Chapter 8.4 How To Make a Numerical Quilt
- Fourier and Ulam -
The profound study of nature is the most fertile source of mathematical discoveries.
-Joseph Fourier
The Fourier way
More than a century before Ulam published his spiral there was another  math-magician named Joseph Fourier  (pictured here [6]), and he discovered that all seemingly chaotic vibrations could be split up into an infinite number of very regular sine and cosine waves.  And a circular motion can represent all sine and cosine waves.
The field of mechanical engineering is a grateful customer of Fourier, since certain violent sine waves can be isolated and terminated by introducing a sine to the system that is equal to the one that needs to be annulled, except that it is the opposite of it.  This way the violent sine wave and the counter-sine wave cancel out and the system is safe.  That is why large engines and machines have big idle chunks of steel hanging from the main shaft.  They are not idle; they are creating a counter sine wave and preventing the machine from shaking apart.
Primes on the cob
Imagine every prime number in the number sequence to be a circular disk with a diameter that corresponds with that prime number (3 is a disk with a diameter of 3; 17 has a diameter of 17, etc.).  And all those disks are being driven by a conveyer belt that in turn is driven by a disk with diameter 1.  This way every disk turns slower than the 1-sized disk.  Here's the trick: Each disk is equipped with a cam that opens a switch when the disk comes in the position in which it was first activated.  The 1-disk has a little tire, and with it, we roll the entire contraption along diverging circles; each circle is 8 positions larger than the prior one (because the Ulam Spiral is not a spiral but closed circles that get larger like peels of an onion). 
Whenever all switches are closed two things happen:
	A paintbrush is activated that paints the spot on which we are.
	An automatic disk-making device constructs a disk with a diameter equal to the location we are on, and adds that, complete with switch, to our Prime-O-Graph. 
Then we let it loose.  A simple device, especially when the disks are not actually there but somewhere on the hard disk of a computer.  It becomes easy to predict the next prime, since this is where no disk is in the position of birth, and all disks turn with a rotation speed that is related to the 1-disk.  Not having to roll along the entire number sequence but simply jumping to the next place to paint is convenient especially when numbers get large and the density of primes becomes low.
So, where is the randomness?  Every disk rotates with absolute precision.  Even at numbers near googolplex, our little 3-disk still rotates the way it always did.  Same with the 5-disk.  Same with the 21398269-1 disk.  They all rotate with absolute precision.  And absolute precision does not exist in nature...
The number sequence depends on fixed values and rigid rules but the universe depends on freedom and sovereignty.  Much like it would take infinite power to become almighty, or infinite knowledge to become omniscient, the number sequence tries to reach the freedom on which the universe is based by being infinitely large.  The universe maintains freedom by not predicting what comes next.  The number sequence tries to imitate that by summing up the infinite amount of outcomes.  Creation allows finite variety and achieves freedom; the number sequence sums up infinite variety but instead of achieving freedom, it achieves infinity.  Or rather, does not achieve freedom.
The number sequence needs perpetual maintenance, perpetual additions in the form of prime numbers to maintain the continuity it depends on.  The universe works in quite the opposite fashion.  Everything that has ever existed, or will ever exist, was already there in that awesome event some call The Beginning and others The Big Bang.  And any system that requires a) infinity and b) constant input of new pulses cannot represent the universe.  And if you think that description fits solely the number sequence you are in for a rather grim surprise. 
Are Numbers Imaginary? 
No.  But we did use our imagination to create them.  However, do not confuse the primes of the other number in the number sequence with imaginary numbers.
Imaginary numbers are dubbed with that unfortunate title, because they dwell in another plane—the complex plane—that we cannot really observe.  Our number sequence resides in the so-called ‘real plane’.
An imaginary number is a number with square that is negative.  When any real number is squared, the result is never negative.  Imaginary numbers have the form bi where b is a non-zero real number and i is the imaginary unit, defined such that i^2=-1.
An imaginary number bi can be added to a real number a to form a complex number of the form a+bi, where a and b are called, respectively, the ‘real part’ and the ‘imaginary part’ of the complex number.  Imaginary numbers can therefore be thought of as complex numbers where the real part is zero, and vice versa.  The name ‘imaginary number’ was originally coined in the 17th century as a derogatory term as such numbers were regarded by some as fictitious or useless, but today they have essential, concrete applications in a variety of scientific, engineering, and related areas.
Geometrically, imaginary numbers are found on the vertical axis of the complex number plane, allowing them to be presented perpendicular to the real axis (Re).  One way of viewing imaginary numbers is to consider a standard number line, positively increasing in magnitude to the right, and negatively increasing in magnitude to the left.  At 0 on this x-axis, a y-axis can be drawn with ‘positive’ direction going up; ‘positive’ imaginary numbers then ‘increase’ in magnitude upwards, and ‘negative’ imaginary numbers ‘decrease’ in magnitude downwards.  This vertical axis is often called the "imaginary axis" and is denoted iR⋅I, or simply Im. 
In this representation, multiplication by –1 corresponds to a rotation of 180 degrees about the origin.  Multiplication by i corresponds to a 90-Degree Rotation in the complex plane in the ‘positive’ direction (i.e., counterclockwise), and the equation i^2=- 1 is interpreted as saying that if we apply two 90-degree rotations about the origin, the net result is a single 180-degree rotation.  Note that a 90-degree rotation in the ‘negative’ direction (i.e. clockwise) also satisfies this interpretation.  This reflects the fact that - i also solves the equation x^2=- 1.

 
The Incompleteness Theorem of Kurt Gödel
- Children of the Primes -
"One might imagine that it would be possible to list all possible ‘obvious’ steps of reasoning once and for all, so that from then on everything could be reduced to computation—i.e. the mere mechanical manipulation of these obvious steps.  What Gödel’s argument shows is that this is not possible.  There is no way of eliminating the need for new ‘obvious’ understandings.  Thus, mathematical understanding cannot be reduced to blind computation." 
-Roger Penrose
Gödel's shocking discovery
In 1931 a grim and paranoid genius named Kurt Gödel  (pictured right [6])—the ‘Martin Luther’  of mathematics—discovered another reason why mathematics cannot be the language in which the whole Truth may one day be expressed.
Probably as poorly understood and often misapplied as Luther (pictured below [6]), Kurt Gödel made himself odious by mathematically proving that a system founded on axioms can never hope to find proof for the consistency of those initial axioms, and will therefore always be incomplete.  This is called Gödel's Incompleteness Theorem and this theorem caused a Reformation in logic philosophy.  Just as Luther  ‘proved’ that salvation comes through faith and not works, Gödel proved that the whole Truth can only be believed and not proven.  Alan Turing (see box below) later reformulated Gödel’s results.
What a bummer for all those hopeful believers who hoped that one day, somehow, either Math or their philosophy, or their religion would lead them out of the bondage of ignorance.  It was not to be...
Since Gödel, we know that a logical system cannot liberate; but that does not mean that rules are bad.  Rules help create order and understanding.  A society based on rules is far better off than a society not based on rules.  And Math put a man on the moon.  Math gave us the Internet.  Math gave us this completely wild global culture.  Yea, Math may run with the wind they call Mariah , and the free-range antelope as long as it does not try to address ‘the whole Truth’.  A system of logic cannot cover Truth; Truth cannot be expressed in logic.  The Grand Unification Theory (GUT) will not be written in Math.  This is also the reason why you never hear anyone solemnly swear to tell the Truth, the whole Truth and nothing but the Truth, so help me Mathematics.
Still, Math is beautiful.  Do thy best old Math, despite thy wrong.
 
ALAN TURING
Alan Mathison Turing, OBE, FRS (23 June 1912 – 7 June 1954), was an English mathematician, logician, cryptanalyst and computer scientist.  He was highly influential in the development of computer science, providing a formalization of the concepts of "algorithm" and "computation" with the Turing machine, which played a significant role in the creation of the modern computer.
In his momentous paper “On Computable Numbers, with an Application to the Entscheidungs problem”, [32] Turing reformulated Kurt Gödel's 1931 results on the limits of proof and computation, replacing Gödel's universal arithmetic-based formal language with what became known as Turing machines, formal and simple devices.  He proved that some such machine would be capable of performing any conceivable mathematical computation if it were representable as an algorithm.  He went on to prove that there was no solution to the Entscheidungs problem by first showing that the halting problem for Turing machines is undecidable: it is not possible to decide, in general, algorithmically whether a given Turing machine will ever halt.  While his proof was published subsequent to Alonzo Church's equivalent proof, in respect to his lambda calculus, Turing was unaware of Church's work at the time.  Turing's approach is considerably more accessible and intuitive.  It was also novel in its notion of a 'Universal (Turing) Machine', the idea that such a machine could perform the tasks of any other machine.  In other words, is provably capable of computing anything that is computable.
A logical system (scientific, philosophical, religious, legal)
Departs from:	And then:	Which leads to:
An axiomatic platform wrought from the present insight of the observer.	starts concluding and forms a body of derivations	Nothing; must remain incomplete.  Hence, a consensus is not possible.  Hence, confusion abounds.

There is, however, nothing wrong with being learned.  Paul was learned.  And so was Jesus.  Solomon was a brilliant poet and philosopher, as well as an economical genius, way ahead of his time; and he wrote, “Trust in the Lord with all your heart, and lean not on your own understanding.” [31]  (Prov. 3:5, NKJV)
We've known for thousands of years, but since Gödel we have a proof written in mankind's most common scientific language, fully in the tradition of Ezra, and making it less and less attractive to believe in anything else than God.
A clear and present example of the fallacy of logic systems is of course the number sequence itself.  From a few simple axioms, an infinite sequence is wrought that will never be watertight and new primes must inveterately be added.
The exact same pattern can be found in math and science.  New ideas and new rules must continuously be added, and after these new rules have run their stretch, holes appear in the continuity of that which is known.  Hence, new rules must be added.
The western legal system, ditto.  “To prove this let facts be submitted to a candid world”.  “We hold these Truths to be self-evident.”  However, as the world turned it became clear that even a document as profound as the Constitution could not cover all possible situations.  Hence, the Amendments and the Supreme Court, which must add new explanations and interpretations to fill the holes in the continuity, came into being.
Bottom line: no logical system will ever be finish forming, can never cover everything, and can never represent Truth.
Principle (9)
No logical system will ever be able to present fully the Truth about the Universe.
The most obvious Biblical application of this principle is of course the building of the Tower of Babel, in Genesis 11.  The people that lived on the Plain of Shinar could not reach heaven by stacking brick upon brick.  But the principle shows up all over Scriptures.  In Luke 17:20 for instance where Jesus says, “The Kingdom of God does not come with your careful observation.” [5] (NIV-UK)
Truth 
“Any concepts or words which have been formed in the past through the interplay between the world and ourselves are not really sharply defined with respect to their meaning: that is to say, we do not know exactly how far they will help us in finding our way in the world.  We often know that they can be applied to a wide range of inner or outer experience, but we practically never know precisely the limits of their applicability.  This is true even of the simplest and most general concepts like "existence" and "space and time".  Therefore, it will never be possible by pure reason to arrive at some absolute truth.”
- Werner Heisenberg
This has a very serious implication because it tells us something about the inherent qualities of Truth even before we understand what Truth actually is. 
 	Just as Socrates could not say what worked, only what not worked, can we say that whatever Truth is, no logical system can ever stack its bricks high enough to reach it.
That implies that, provided we assume that Truth could exist, it must present itself fully and singularly from outside the observer’s frame of reference.
In other words, Truth must simply show up and be absolutely weird!  And it happened to Moses, who had been trained for forty years in the science of his time.  In Exodus 3, he concludes that what he sees is not congruent with what he believes—a burning bush, yet not consumed.  And God speaks… 
After the initial encounter, when the observer somehow realizes that what she sees is the Truth, she may begin to explicate within that initial and all-encompassing encounter, exactly as everything that has been made exists within that awesome singularity called The Beginning.
 
She may ponder and ponder and allow Truth to crystallize into a personal application of that all-encompassing Truth.
Nevertheless, as axioms lead to an unfixable chasm, the lack of such a chasm will not lead to something like axioms: unexplainable assumptions or initial and self-evident truths that would force the observer into one specific initial position.  In Truth, there is no specific initial position.  There is only freedom.  Where axioms will always miss their intention, Truth will always set free.  (For more about Truth, see 14.1 Misunderstandings of the Bible: Is Truth the same thing as Reality?  Truth is a Person.)
We have established that Truth is initially singular.  We have also established that a system that leans on the stacking of facts and certainties will never reach it.  And that means that a system that leans on facts (science, our legal system, philosophy) needs to add a certain component that is not just another fact, to establish some kind of consistency that could pass for truth in order to derive conclusions and verdicts.  Science uses the phrase ‘most likely’ to seal the gap.  Law uses the phrase ‘beyond reasonable doubt’.  In both cases, an appeal is made to the trust of the spectators.  Trust is needed in any kind of theory in order to breach the gap caused by the inherent incompleteness of any system that uses facts for its bricks.
Where o where does trust come from?  The human heart, perhaps?  Intuition?  Not by a long shot.  As Jeremiah  once wrote, “The heart is the most deceitful thing”. (Jer. 71:9, my translation)
When Koch came out with his snowflake, mathematicians found it horrendous as it went directly against all intuition that a finite surface could be encompassed by an infinite periphery.  But it did.  Weirdness ruled.  The earth was not flat after all.
Still, theoretical physicists had already surmised of something similar that most likely actually occurs in nature.  Due to extreme space-time curvature, a black hole has an infinite radius and a finite diameter.  Hence, volume is infinite while circumference is far from it.  How is this possible?  It just is.  Intuition is most often flat wrong.  And, what about the universe itself?  It is the only thing in existence with an inside and no outside... 
The new buzzword in theoretical physics these days is String Theory .  One of the things this young and pretty theory suggests is that besides the regular four dimensions of space-time, there are a cool seven extra dimensions of pure weirdness wrapped up into extremely tiny balls of dimensional yarn.
Summary 9: The Incompleteness Theorem of Kurt Gödel
A logical system is always based on axioms. 
A logical system cannot prove the consistency of its own axioms and can hence not prove whether it is true. 
No logical system will ever be able to prove everything. 
Truth cannot be reached by logic! 
Truth is singular (Truth is One).



 
The Most Deceitful Thing
- Truth & Patterns -
If you look for truth, you may find comfort in the end; if you look for comfort you will not get either comfort or truth only soft soap and wishful thinking to begin, and in the end, despair.
-C. S. Lewis
One aspect of this is that rationality of thought imposes a limit on a person's concept of his relation to the cosmos.
-John Forbes Nash, Jr.

A face in the clouds
So, what is it?  Is it a butterfly?  Perhaps some big scary monster?  Or the landlord's aura when the rent is due and the funds depleted?  Someone from the Delta Quadrant, ordering a pizza in sign language?  The sole remnant of a rare and silent wrong...?
Well, it is none of the above, or rather, all of the above.  This picture is a crude imitation of a Rorschach Ink Test, an abstract blot of ink lobbed on paper to reveal what occupies an observer's mind.  Huckleberry from Police Academy would probably have seen his gun in this image.  Rockhound from Armageddon  would have reported seeing a woman with large breasts.  Anybody else would have their minds search their memory and associate the abstraction to feelings of anxiety and fear, or endearment and amusement, or whatever the person's general undertone would be.

Paul Simon  sang it in The Boxer, "...still a man hears what he wants to hear and disregards the rest, oo lalalala lalalala..."
And what about this one?  What is it?  The Yeti finally captured?  Sunrise over Sinai?  A trendy painting by a famous artist, entitled composition in shades?  
Nope.  None of the above.
It's Julia Roberts’  voluptuous kisser.  Look at the whole picture below, a frame from the movie Conspiracy Theory 
It's her, isn't it?  It's Julia Roberts.
Well, no again.  The picture to the right is a bouquet of pixels, just like the smudgy detail to the upper left.  The pictures to the upper left and the right are really the same.  The right picture contains the upper left picture.  There is no difference.  Then why do we all mistake the right picture [6] for Julia Roberts?
 
Imagine for instance what it would be like to be a dog or a cat.  In that situation, we would compose our image of reality largely by smells.  The picture to the right does not smell like Julia at all (provided we know what she smells like, but probably not like a computer screen) and if only we base our perception on smell, we would certainly not mistake the picture for Julia.
Humankind’s amazing ability to see patterns is often as helpful as it is confusing.  Man's primary sense is vision and when our eyes tell us that there is a pattern our other senses are often discarded.  Hence, we make ourselves believe that we see Julia Roberts where she is not, or recognizable features in a foggy stain.  Recognizing patterns allows us to process large quantities of information at once.  It allows us to plot our position in the world around us, to enjoy music, art, fellow humans since all behavior and all objects are in fact patterns caused by huge amounts of little particles or impulses.
Patterns are good.  Patterns are our friend—except when you see a pattern that no one else sees.  In that case, you are both brilliant and apt for volleys of wrongful derision, or completely nuts like Jerry Fletcher (played by Mel Gibson ) in Conspiracy Theory, and in for a sea of trouble, against which no arms can be raised.  Anyway, history, as well as literature, suggests that the seers of the unconfirmed are often also speakers of the unconfirmed, usually lonesome souls blabbering on about the end of the world, howling at the moon, or hugging curls of caustic fires set to end their diatribes.  If you do not fit in to that good old pattern called ‘proper human behavior’, there is always some xenophobic  volunteer to light the stake. 
Nuts or nostos 
The question is: when is a pattern really there and when do we only think it is?  A face in the clouds is not really there.  Deriving our reality model from that face in the clouds will throw our world in disarray as soon as the cloud dissipates.  And sure, old Mel was right in the movie but many conspiracy theories are ‘houses of cards’; mountains of data woven together upon imaginary spines.  It's not a valid argument to believe that a pattern is there.  Everybody who sees a pattern somewhere is convinced that the pattern is really there, and all additional observations are interpreted in such a way as to confirm that belief.
A pattern in the clouds is always something we know and we see it in the clouds because we project that which we know upon that which we observe—even when no one else sees that pattern.  And the fact that everybody sees a certain pattern is also not a valid argument for the pattern's factuality.  There was a time that all observations about the earth confirmed the consensual belief that the earth was flat.  And that turned out to be a face in the clouds as well.
Principle (10a)
Our beliefs are not valid instruments to analyze either reality in general or any specific pattern.
Now what?
Well, think of Mel's conspiracy theory.  Some of it turned out to be right but most of it was projecting a paranoid mind upon unrelated events.  And there's the key word: unrelated. 
All patterns are equal, but some patterns are more equal than others
We can discern two kinds of patterns: those that are confirmed by the elements that make them up and those that are not confirmed by the elements that make them up.  Whether we notice a face in the clouds, or a woman in a bunch of pixels, or a conspiracy in world events, the water droplets, pixels, or the world-event-causing-folks in which we make our observation, do not confirm our observations.  These kinds of patterns are so-called ‘projected patterns’.
There is nothing inherent in the elements that seem to create a projected pattern, except the expectation of the observer.  Take away the observer and the pattern disappears along with her.  A non-projected pattern on the other hand does not depend on an observer.  The elements themselves contain that which causes the pattern (droplets that make a snowflake; atoms that make a rock; cells that make an organism; humans that make a culture).
It is often suggested that Truth is one of those projected patterns, and that it differs per observer.  But when we partly define Truth as that which (at least) covers all nature, it should also contain our various perspectives since they are part of nature.  Truth must exist before observation because it must also contain a human who does not observe, or even the time when there were no humans around to do any observing.  Truth cannot be a projected pattern and must therefore be a non-projected pattern.
 
Principle (10b):
Truth is a pattern that is confirmed by all elements that make it up or are covered by it.
Sentient beings like us walk through this world projecting themselves upon their surroundings.  Hence, we see faces in clouds, women in pictures and conspiracies in unrelated events.  Humans differ from animals not in their greater ability to notice patterns, but by being able to be critical about their perceptions and discard their own perspective.  That leads to communion with Truth.
Principle (10c):
Truth can only be noticed when the private perspective is doubted.

Summary 10: The Most Deceitful Thing; Truth & Patterns
Either a pattern comes from the observer's willingness to project, or from the elements that make the pattern up. 
The observer's understanding is not a valid tool to assess reality. 
Truth cannot be a projected pattern and must therefore be a not-projected pattern.
Doubting presuppositional certainties allows Truth to approach.


 
The Mandelbrot Set
- A Snowman made from many Snowmen -
“My fate has been that what I undertook was fully understood only after the fact.” 
-Benoit Mandelbrot
Benoit Mandelbrot.
Another Chaos pioneer, and probably the most celebrated one, was Benoit Mandelbrot  (pictured here [6]) as his famous Mandelbrot Set has served as symbol of Chaos Theory ever since the field emerged.  The Mandelbrot Set is a graphic image, just like the rain-or-sunshine graph of Lorentz, except that the Mandelbrot Set does not really cover some real process.  It's just a formula that gives a pretty picture (endearingly nick-named the ‘snowman’), but there's something very special about this particular picture because when we zoom in on any part of it, we are bound to come across the very same basic form, embedded in the texture of the mother image.  But the little snowman is not an exact duplicate of the mother image.  It obviously follows the same basic design but is always unique.  Not unlike snowflakes.
If we would then zoom in on that little snowman, we would find more swirls and eddies, and deep down again a snowman!  The Mandelbrot Set contains infinite detail, and infinite layers upon layers of snowmen embedded in terrific swipes of frozen motion:
 
Take your time to admire the Mandelbrot Set .  It will help you understand the Universe...  We recognize the snowman in the first and last frame and make a connection, but the large-scale snowman contains not only the little ones, also all the sea horse tails and swirls and eddies.  Then all those swirls must be part of the little snowman as much as they are part of the big one.  It is not just the little, recognizable image of the snowman that constitutes an element of the larger whole, but a tornado of motion of which the snowman is only the eye.
Imagine we are taking an elevator down the abstract space of the Mandelbrot Set.  We start on the top floor and start sinking down into the splendid expanse wafting out as details emerge.  We pass loosely connected clouds of blue dust, firmly connected ‘objects’ and finally a replica of the top floor but slightly different; we have reached what we will call the first floor down from top.  Sinking further down into the swirls and eddies of the first floor down we will pass more clouds and shapes, and after a while again a replica of the first floor down.  The Mandelbrot Set is truly a magical place.
Snowman top floor
Consists of 
 	
Loosely related smears

Tightly knitted forms

Snowman 1 floor down

Snowman 1 floor down
Consists of 
 	
Loosely related smears

Tightly knitted forms

Snowman 2nd floor down

Snowman 2nd floor down
...et cetera

In chapter 8, we have already established that the math upon which the Mandelbrot Set is founded does not take in account quantum fuzziness, because math cannot duplicate pure randomness (which means pure unpredictability and the quantum sovereignty upon which the universe is founded).  So, let’s imagine that we do take in account quantum fuzziness.  Let’s imagine that the little snowman (and all its protruding eddies) is a quantum, and the large snowman is the structure that the quanta form. 
Now imagine that the little snowmen are atoms and the big one is a large structure (like a snowflake).  The eddies then become a fine representation of the atoms’ force fields and behavior, the webs of energy that binds them all together to form the big one.
Or imagine that the little snowmen are bees that together make a hugely complex hive.  Is that right?  Does the snowman story apply to a beehive?  Why doesn't a beehive look like a big bee?
Well, it does!  The little bee is not just the motionless image of a bee but its entire behavior, its instincts and function in the hive; the swirls and eddies of the little snowman.  And not all little snowmen of a beehive are the same; there are different ones.  Together they make a structure that comes from the inputs of all those little different little ones.  The hive comes from bees and from nothing else.
The same goes for ants that make an anthill.  Same goes for humans that make a planet buzz, with cities, governments, and satellites in orbit.
Are you surprised that a principle based on quantum fuzziness is applicable to animals and humans?  Then hold on to your cortical node because it is about to blow. 
More technically, the Mandelbrot Set is the set of values of c in the complex plane for which the orbit of 0 under iteration of the complex quadratic polynomial z_(n+1)  =〖 z〗_n^2  + c remains bounded.  That is, a complex number, c, is part of the Mandelbrot Set if, when starting with z_0  = 0 and applying the iteration repeatedly, the absolute value of z_n never exceeds a certain number (that number depends on c) however large n gets.
Summary 11: The Mandelbrot Set
Mandelbrot Set contains infinite detail, and infinite layers upon layers of snowmen embedded in terrific swipes of frozen motion.
Self-similarity exists within the Mandelbrot set.



 
The Universal Set
- A Set made from many Sets -
The truth you believe and cling to makes you unavailable to hear anything new. 
- Pema Chodron 
Atom, cell, mind; a set in a set in a set
The Universal Set   works like the Mandelbrot Set except that the Universal Set starts on ground level and the observer takes an elevator upward instead of downward.  I call this model the Universal Set—a name borrowed from mathematics—because the Universal Mold is identical to the way sets and subsets are defined and organized.
Set theory is the branch of mathematics that studies sets, which are collections of objects.  Although any type of object can be collected into a set, set theory is applied most often to objects that are relevant to mathematics.
The modern study of set theory was initiated by Georg Cantor  (pictured here [6]) and Richard Dedekind in the 1870s.  After the discovery of paradoxes in naive set theory, numerous axiom systems were proposed in the early twentieth century, of which the Zermelo–Fraenkel axioms, with the axiom of choice, are the best known.
The Universal Mold is the most persistent ‘shape’ in nature, but one should understand that the Universal Mold is not a mere shape but an abbreviated, stylized representation of a creature's behavioral faculties.
The Universal Mold

 	The Universal Mold  is a basic shape from which other shapes are derived.  All these shapes subsequently show the same, basic design:
	A static and central nucleus contains all the information to run the unit.
	A dynamic body executes the commands of the nucleus and maintains an economy with the neighboring units.  It holds the mold together.
	A characterization or representation of the dynamic and static parts
The Universal Mold constitutes the building block of every major realm, from matter (the atom), to life (the cell) to the mental sphere (the consciousness).
The first three levels are easily recognized but the fourth may need some explanation.  And what about the fourth level?  Is that the final one, the top floor?  Perhaps, but perhaps not... 
The Universal Set
Based on the Mandelbrot Set, the Universal Set displays three self-similar levels.  In the pages that follow, you will find an extensive treatment per level.

 
First Level: Atoms
 		Static nucleus containing all information about the atom

	Dynamic orbital field of electrons around the nucleus

	Molecules: Bonded atoms; (atoms attracted to community?)
________________________________________
Second Level: Cells
 	
	DNA

	Living organisms; prokaryotes and eukaryotes.

	Colonies of organisms; organisms attracted to community
________________________________________
Third Level: Minds
 	
	The mind; brain?


	Human-kind consciousness, intelligence

	People of Earth; human-kind attracted to community
________________________________________
Summary 12: The Universal Set
The Universal Mold is the most fundamental structure in the universe.  It consists of a static nucleus governing a dynamic body, which maintains an economy with neighboring cells. 
On earth, there are three self-similar levels: mater, life, and mind. 
Both Chaos Theory and the Bible predict a fourth level: minds will organize around Truth.


 
Chapter 12.1 The Universal Set
- First Level: The Atom -
“History is the short trudge from Adam to atom.” 
- Leonard L. Levinson 
First Level: The Atom
The complexity of nature commences with the first Universal instance: the atom.  The nucleus of an atom contains all information to determine the properties of the atom, and that information is nothing more than the number of nucleons that make up the nucleus.  Hydrogen is the simplest atom.  It consists of one single proton and one electron in orbit around it.  A single free proton is still a hydrogen nucleus, but an electron at large is just a free electron.  That is because electrons sometimes simply escape the atom, altering the condition of the atom but not the constitution.
 	
	Static nucleus containing all information about the atom

	Dynamic orbital field of electrons around the nucleus

	Molecules: Bonded atoms; (atoms attracted to community?)
For instance, natrium comes from a nucleus of eleven protons and eleven neutrons, which create room for eleven electrons to zip around the nucleus, spread out over three rings.  But often the eleventh electron takes off, leaving the total atom a charge of one proton, hence making a natrium ion.  If somehow, instead of an electron, a proton would escape the nucleus, the entire atom would change essence, as the nucleus would contain only ten protons, which constitutes neon.  Natrium is a white, shiny metal.  Neon is a gas.  That's how much a tiny difference matters.
The atoms of noble gases remain solitary but pretty much all other atoms form molecules.  These molecules may vary from tiny ones such as H2O to humongous and almost unfathomable structures such as the various DNA molecules.  And all those material particles and structures they make celebrate the vast expanse of the universe in an incredible energetic economy.  From close to frozen hydrogen atoms adrift in space to roaring stars of incredible vigor or even black holes that are so powerful that all forces except gravity vanish, along with any recognizable structure such as that of atoms and molecules.  They dance, share energy, create waves that combine to a whisper that travels the universe with the speed of light.  The more we learn about the universe the more we should realize of what a magnificent wilderness we are a part.
Electrons are known to appear in nature in clouds or clusters, even when they do not have a nucleus to guide them.  This way electrical potentials may travel and cause reactions.  In a way, the Universal Image is preceded by an era in complexity that could be characterized as a ‘body without a nucleus’.  Before nuclei existed, electrons were, and after nuclei were formed, it took some time until electrons connected themselves to them.
Molecules make objects.  From the tiniest kernels of sand to single celestial objects perhaps as large as our entire solar system.  But some molecules huddle up in such a way that the original atomic image from which they all sprang emerges from their ranks.  Those compositions are the Universal Images of the next floor, yet to the inhabitants of ground-floor level, these structures do not differ in the slightest way from all other objects molecules make.  To a flint of a kernel of sand, a small single-cellular creature is just another flint of matter.  It takes life to recognize life.  The dwellers of the Universal Set may look down and recognize lower levels but they cannot look up.  All higher floors are projected on the ceilings of the lower, and not noticed by the indigenous to be any different.
 
Chapter 12.2 The Universal Set
- Second Level: The Cell -
“A living cell requires energy not only for all its functions, but also for the maintenance of its structure.” 
	Albert Szent-Gyorgyi 
Second Level: The Living Cell
As with the atom, the living cell consists of an active cell body and a passive nucleus that contains all information to run the cell.  As with the atom, the nucleus cannot change without altering the very constitution of the cell  The body is perpetually composed according to the available nutrients, after the format the nucleus demands.  The body maintains communications with neighboring cells and all cells comprise the economy we call the biosphere.
 	
	DNA

	Living organisms; prokaryotes and eukaryotes.

	Colonies of living organisms; organisms attracted to community

It is really quite difficult to pinpoint precisely at which level of complexity a bundle of atoms and molecules may actually be called alive.  A living cell is nothing but a vortex in which material particles are captured, applied and, at some time or another, done away with.  Compare life with traffic on a street during rush hour congestion.  Cars standing still seem to form something, a mechanical snake that releases cars at one end and absorbs cars at the other.  Wait half an hour and the snake is still there, even though every car that made it up half an hour ago has been replaced by another one.
Just like traffic congestion starts when cars are forced to slow down a bit, so may we speak of proto-life when atoms begin to form chemical compounds.  And just like there's a big difference to having to brake every once in a while, and running into a traffic jam that backs traffic up for miles, so is a living cell different from complex chemical structures.  Still, there is an obvious relation and no real separation.
According to the fossil record, life began, just like electron activity, as cells without a clearly defined nucleus (prokaryotes).  Later, living cells emerged that had nuclei (eukaryotes) .  Single cellular organisms ruled the planet for about the same amount of time as multi cellular organisms have.  The fossil record suggests that planet earth has known only single cellular life from the moment life emerged about “4 billion years ago to 2 billion years ago”—I do not agree.  Although their presence was not immediately obvious (their existence was not known until Van Leeuwenhoek invented the microscope), they were still very much around and formed the foundation of the biosphere.  In fact, most life on planet earth is single cellular.  And, as with the atom, material may enter the cell body and alter the condition of the cell but not the constitution.  Any change in DNA however will produce an entire new creature.
An astonishing conclusion of the Universal Set is something that has been previously suggested by certain cosmologists and students of the Evolution Theory: if indeed the formation of living cells is due to the powers of self-similarity, then the genetic nuclei of cells were formed long before eukaryotes emerged on planet earth.  As with the nucleosynthesis in the realm of matter, the complex molecular strands of DNA may have been formed along with prokaryotic life forms, perhaps even in space instead of on the surface of our planet.  DNA and prokaryotic life may have existed side by side just as protons and electrons have, only to unite in an incredible event that mimicked the formation of hydrogen atoms, when the space-time continuum commenced and the Great Light shone.  A genius biologist recently figured out that life began as a family of eukaryotic life forms that has largely died out.  But one member of this large family gave rise to the entire group of multi-cellular creatures that lived on.  Much alike the way matter was established.
Most, if not all, single cellular organisms are part of some ecosystem or another; the ‘molecules’ of the biosphere; colonies and symbiotic partnerships.  Some of these bio-molecules are small while others are huge and intensely complex; so complex that the identity of the individual seems to vanish against the ‘identity’ of the colony.
All the way up against the ceiling of the second floor are ‘colonies’ that are comprised of cells that all contain the same DNA.  These colonies are more than tight partnerships; they are multi-cellular organisms, the Universal Image, Third Floor.

 
Chapter 12.3 The Universal Set
- Third Level: The Conscious Mind -
My religion consists of a humble admiration of the illimitable superior spirit who reveals himself in the slight details we are able to perceive with our frail and feeble mind.
-Albert Einstein
“We must assume behind this force the existence of a conscious and intelligent mind.  This mind is the matrix of all matter.” 
-Max Planck
Third Level: The Conscious Mind
As with the atom and the living cell, the conscious mind consist of an organism that is conscious, and the entire body of things of which this mind is conscious.  Moreover, as with the previous two Universal Set levels, the nucleic mind determines the contents of the body of observations around it.  After all, a squirrel will notice other things than a dog or a ballerina or a truck driver.  In fact, squirrel, dog, ballerina and truck driver may sit on the same park bench overlooking the world while the sphere of things they are conscious of is completely different. 
 	
	The nucleic mind; brain?


	Human-kind consciousness, intelligence

	People of Earth; human-kind attracted to community

A squirrel will notice the bag of peanuts the truck driver is holding.  The dog will notice the truck drivers after-shave and the ballerina's perfume and most likely also the squirrel.  The ballerina may notice certain things and the truck driver will notice other things, smells, sounds, things that invoke associations, memories and all those things that make a ballerina a ballerina and a truck driver a truck driver.
As with the atom and the cell, if the body of observations (and memories, etc.) alters, the condition of the mind alters but not the constitution.  Things may enter a mind's scope, sit there for a while, and leave again, but a squirrel will never change into a truck driver.
So far, the relation between atoms, cells and minds may be obvious.  However, the most difficult to understand stage of mental complexity is the prokaryotic phase.  How can a cloud of observations exist when there is no nucleic creature to observe it?
Before a creature receives a brain, there is unity.  The corpus certainly has some kind of central identity around which it resolves.  The mental equivalent of this can be seen in animal intelligence.  There are certainly considerations and even contemplation in an animal mind, but there is no hard reality model from which an identity model or long term planning can be derived.  Still, know that extensions of the Universal Set (which we will not address here) strongly suggest that the so-called ‘human intelligence’ could commence deep in the animal realm.
But the most amazing suggestion of the Universal Set is the mental equivalent of the nucleosynthesis.  What to make of that?  Could it really be true that prior to the formation of the actual entity some kind of soul or essence is already forged?  Most mystic literature from all over the world seems to concur with this idea even though no real scientific theory has been able to follow in its wake.  Many skeptic scientists will most likely—and frankly, hopefully, even dutifully—frown deeply at the Universal Set if we do not soon submit some harder proof than a rather poetic perspective that might be nothing but a face in the clouds.  But, cloudy as the Universal Set may seem, and in the words of the great Captain Kathryn Janeway : "There's coffee in that nebula!"
 
Chapter 12.4 The Universal Set
- Fourth Level: Grand Unifying Force?-
“Now I saw a new heaven and a new earth, for the first heaven and the first earth had passed away.  Also there was no more sea.” [31]
	Revelation 21:1 (NKJV)
The wolf also shall dwell with the lamb, The leopard shall lie down with the young goat, The calf and the young lion and the fatling together; And a little child shall lead them. [31]
	Isaiah 11:6 (NKJV)
“Most people never run far enough on their first wind to find out they've got a second.”
	William James
Fourth Level: Grand Unifying Force
I have not quite figured out how to draw this level, but the fourth level is self-similar to the previous levels.
If cells are self-similar reflections of the atom, and minds are reflections of cells, and if this trend continues—and why shouldn't it?—we may expect a Universal Image that differs from minds as much as minds differ from one single cell, and one cell differs from an atom.  Though the atom is made up from atomic subparticles, just as a cell is made from atoms, and minds from cells.  In short, we should expect that the total economy of minds of man will seek to settle around some kind of nucleic Attractor that will then govern the dynamics of humankind.  Isaiah 9:7 says:  
Of the greatness of his government and peace there will be no end.  He will reign on David’s throne and over his kingdom, establishing and upholding it with justice and righteousness from that time on and forever. [5] (NIV)
Could Christ—the Son—be the universal Attractor? 
This nucleic ‘Attractor’ also will cause such harmony that a global ‘soul’ is possible, even inevitable.  Ephesians 4:3-5 gives us some insight into that global soul.
3 Make every effort to keep the unity of the Spirit through the bond of peace.  4 There is one body and one Spirit, just as you were called to one hope when you were called; 5 one Lord, one faith, one baptism; [5] (NIV)
And what is that nucleus?  It must be something around which we all feel confident to be, voluntarily and wholly.  It must be a consensus in which all our differences are contained and even celebrated.  Truth, in one (mysterious) word.  John 8:32 states:
And you shall know the truth, and the truth shall make you free.” [31] (NKJV)
The Universal Set predicts that someday humankind will gather around Truth and be fulfilled, like once atoms reached their final potential and gave rise to life, and life reached its final potential and gave rise to mind.  Likewise will man's total mind become a cradle in which a nucleus that already exists, like the atomic nucleus and the cellular DNA, may come to reign.  Hebrew 2:5-8 says that the earth was originally subjected to man (see also Genesis 1:26):
5 For He did not subject to angels the world to come, concerning which we are speaking.  6 But one has testified somewhere, saying, “What is man, that You remember him?  Or the son of man, that You are concerned about him?  7 “You have made him 1for a little while lower than the angels; You have crowned him with glory and honor, And have appointed him over the works of Your hands;  8 You have put all things in subjection under his feet.”  For in subjecting all things to him, He left nothing that is not subject to him.  But now we do not yet see all things subjected to him. [1] (NASB)
The eukaryotic phase of this glorious state is easily recognized as it follows the design of the eukaryotic mind: mankind is already gathering around some kind of global awareness even though that lingering nucleus is not yet received, nor are man's minds propelled by the same mental constitution—a mental DNA that is the same for everyone but causes some to become the mental equivalents of transparent eye-cells, some contracting muscle cells, and some electric current carrying nerve cells—like members of the corporal body. Romans 12:4-5 says:
4 For as we have many members in one body, but all the members do not have the same function, 5 so we, being many, are one body in Christ, and individually members of one another. [31](NKJV)
And at the center of this body is the conscious mind.  Revelation 7:17 says:
“For the Lamb at the center of the throne will be their shepherd; ‘he will lead them to springs of living water.’  ‘And God will wipe away every tear from their eyes.’” [5]  (NIV)
What may it be, this Truth?  Hard to say, speaking from a secular perspective.  Truth cannot be fathomed by those who do not understand it, or to which Truth has not revealed itself.  But we know that Truth cannot be reached by a logical system.  It cannot be reached by stacking conclusion upon conclusion.  Truth must be the only consensus possible.  It must contain the entire stretch of human mentality.  It must be able to reign by permission of its subjects, as it can only function when its subjects recognize themselves in it.  Truth, whatever it is, is a majestic thing.  And even though we may not exactly know what it is, the Universal Set allows us to understand how it will come: just like atomic nuclei came to the electrons and formed hydrogen, and DNA came to prokaryotes and formed eukaryotes.  Likewise will humankind gather, ever so slowly, around something that exists already in a form that is compatible with the human condition.  Then it will be acknowledged, accepted and embraced to form a new, or rather next or trans-mental life form.  Could that Truth be Christ?
Jesus answered, “I am the way and the truth and the life.  No one comes to the Father except through me. [5]
-  John 14:6 (NIV, emphasis added)
So where does this all lead?  The Universal Set would suggest that at the core, the nucleus, God—the Father—the static and central nucleus contains all the information to run the unit.  The Father is the nucleus of the Trinity—the brain, the DNA. 
Christ would be the dynamic body that executes the commands of the nucleus and maintains an economy with the neighboring units—creates all things and holds it all together.  Remember that in Chapter 6.1, I made a case for Christ as the creative force—electromagnetism (see Colossians 1:15-16).  At level one, the electron field.  At level two, the dynamic, living organism.  At level three, human consciousness.  Christ is the dynamic, “living” part of the trinity—the life force.  
“Jesus saith unto him, I am the way, the truth, and the life: no man cometh unto the Father, but by me.” [8] 
- John 14:6 (KJV, emphasis added)
Now the Spirit would be the characterization or representation of the dynamic and static parts, that which attracts the persons of God into community and unity.  Recall that in Genesis 1:2, the Spirit of God was there.  Also, John 20:22 says, “And when He had said this, He breathed on them, and said to them, “Receive the Holy Spirit.”  The Spirit brings about unity: molecules, colonies of living organisms, people of the earth, and a triune God.
Together, the fourth level of the Universal Set comprises the Trinity—Farther, Son, and Spirit.  As the universe is not expanding and has no outside, so the triune God is never changing and has no outside—that’s hard to draw.  Think of level one.  The atom does not really have an outside—though this is not completely representative of God—but a nucleus and a ‘rings’ of orbiting electrons.  Perhaps the Spirit could be described as the molecular weight—that which describes and differentiates.


 
Agape and Gravity
- For Whom the Bell Curve Tolls -
The value of a man should be seen in what he gives and not in what he is able to receive.
-Albert Einstein
Love is something more stern and splendid than mere kindness.
-C. S. Lewis
Gravity cannot be held responsible for people falling in love.
-Albert Einstein
Emphasis was usually put on the horizontal acceleration factor, for the simple reason that ordinary structures have a built-in safety factor for the vertical component; that is, gravity. 
-Charles Francis Richter 
Crazy little thing called gravity
The Universal Set's primal principle is that the Universal Image is repeated on different scales.  But it must be stressed that the Universal Image is not the mere appearance of the unit, but the entire range of behavioral properties that make it what it is.  In other words, not only is the general appearance mimicked on a larger scale, also the fundamental qualities that come with the shape.
Atoms are compounds of quanta, but these compounds are so close to the level of quanta that quantum mechanics applies.  The Universal Set demands that all properties are copied, and thus, some kind of mimicked 'quantum mechanics' must also apply to living cells and likewise to the mental realm.  Einstein once joked about gravity saying that it could not be held responsible for people falling in love.  Now it seems that perhaps it can.  Or rather, that beneath the three or almost four appearances there is a parental source from which all Elements come.
Like the four forces are—the four facets of the Grand Unified Forces—matter, life and mind, are three articulations of something even more fundamental.  And being acquainted with the properties of the atom, we should not be too surprised to see those properties revisited in the building that is made in their image.
Because, where does a phenomenon like love come from?  How does the universe bring forth such a thing?  Why is it such a universal thing that seems to work for all people, despite culture or position?  The answer may be that the principle of self-similarity that spawned life upon matter, and mind upon life, also generated the biological and mental equivalents of the four forces.
Sadly, our crude language fails to make a distinction between certain forms of love; but some older languages do.  Love—called agape in the Greek—covers general appreciation and respect, is not directed at a certain individual (phileo), and is not celebrated in physical arousal (eros).  Probably the most famous poem regarding general love is a paragraph once entrusted to a small group of Corinthians, almost two millennia ago.  Without having to subscribe to any possible religious validity of the text, we may recognize the amazing parallels between the agape described in 1 Corinthians 13 and the universal force we call gravity.
Gravity is a rather ‘mild’ force on the individual-particle level.  But considered on a larger scale, gravity is the force that literally runs and directs the universe.  Every particle is subjected to gravity; the universe looks the way it does because of it.  Gravity was the first force to break free from the Grand Unified Force.  As skillfully described by Kip Thorne  in his book “Black Holes and Time Warps” , gravity was the creative force that brought forth the universe, as we know it.  Gravity is also the only force capable of getting so strong that all other forces fade away (in black holes).  Gravity curves space and forms the very realm in which we live.  It causes particles, planets, stars, even entire galaxies to seek common centers.  And gravitational fields allow objects to believe that they are accelerating, while in fact they are stationary.
Principle (13)
Gravity is the king of forces.
Now look at agape.  Agape—as a noun—is not used in ancient writings, other than the New Testament.  Christian writers used the word agape to specifically denote ‘Christian’ love or ‘charity’ (1 Corinthians 13:1–8), or even God himself (1 John 4:8, ὁ θεὸς ἀγάπη ἐστίν, “God is Love”), and should certainly not be mistaken for the passionate feelings people may feel for a lover.  Agape is the gentle baseline that carries the symphony; a foundation upon which all purposeful action is undertaken.  Agape is directed toward the object without any expatiations from the object.  What gravity is to the universe, agape is for the human soul; the total play of all souls combined, and that which they make (in a perfect world).  The GUF, in one word—that from which all other things flow.  Think about it.  Culture the way it was designed—not as we know it—could not exist if we did not absolutely count on other people to behave in some way like ourselves.  People obey the same traffic laws.  They speak the same language.  Count the same currency.
Now, agape, like gravity has a central source, the GUF.  However, agape, unlike gravity can be rejected—at least for now.  Hence, culture is not comprehensive.  Subcultures exist which ‘conform’ to the agape standard (1 Corinthians 13), but there is no universal culture that ascribes to it.  Imagine if planets and other objects decided to reject gravity.  The rules for the physical realm are different from those of the mental (or spiritual) realm—as are the rules for quanta realm versus the rest of the real world.
Within subcultures, agape makes people seek common centers, just as gravity does to the universe.  Gravity also allows the universe to keep ‘bank accounts of motion.’  What is ‘motion’ in the mental realm?  And what is it that moves?  A material particle moves relatively to another particle when it absorbs at least one photon of energy.  Energy is also the source from which all particles come.  The mental (or spiritual) equivalent of energy is knowledge in the broadest sense of the word; whatever the mind is acquainted with, no matter how deeply hidden in layers of sub-consciousness.  Knowledge, or awareness, is also the source—or rather cause—of the mental realm.  When two particles exist side by side and only one absorbs a photon, the particles will diverge.  When two minds exist ‘side by side,’ or in some kind of parallel state, and only one absorbs a bit of knowledge, the minds will diverge in their sense of reality.  Motion in the mental realm is caused by awareness; ‘motion’ itself is perhaps the mental activity generally known as contemplation.
Note that when a particle absorbs energy it will not only pick up speed, it will also gain mass since E=mc^2.  A mind that absorbs knowledge will not only pick up ‘speed’ but will also gain the mental equivalent of mass.  This is highly typical because it allows us to derivate some kind of ‘mental thermodynamics’:
Material	Biological	Mental	Global
Gravity
That which causes bio-economy	Agape
?
(something interplanetary?)
Strong nuclear force
That which causes DNA to form
Intelligence; or that which allows observations to be linked into one reality model	Global awareness; that which composes a nucleic consensus
Electro-magnetism
That which allows nutrients to be absorbed and utilized; makes the body alive; allows interactions with others	That which allows observations to be absorbed and utilized; makes the mind active; allows interactions with others	?
(something interplanetary?)
Weak nuclear force
That which causes genetic decay or mutations	That which allows self-criticism and the alteration of unstable reality models
That which attacks whatever emerges as global nucleus; purges unstable convictions

According to the Universal Set, the global nucleus is already around.  We should be able to find traces of the existence of a possible global consensus.  And we have already established that this consensus, or Truth, should not be an expression or excursion in numbers or any other system of axioms or logic, nor should it be biased towards a specific cultural perspective.
Agape Usage
Although some sources claim agapeh appears in the Odyssey twice, the word is in fact not used there.  Instead, two forms of the word agape may be found: agapêton and agapazomenoi.  Agapêton is found in Book 5 of the Odyssey and means ‘beloved’ or ‘well-loved’.  Agapazomenoi is found in books 7 and 17 of the Odyssey and means ‘to treat with affection’.
The verb agapao is used extensively in the Septuagint as the translation of the common Hebrew term for love that is used to show affection for husband/wife and children, brotherly love, and God's love for humanity.  It is uncertain why agapao was chosen, but similarity of consonant sounds (ahava) may have played a part.  The Greek concept may have originated as a transliteration from some Semitic tongue.  This usage provides the context for the choice of this otherwise obscure word, in preference to other more common Greek words, as the most frequently used word for love in Christian writings.  The use of the noun agape in this way appears to be an innovation of the New Testament writers, but is probably derived from the use of the verb agapao in the Septuagint.
A journalist of Time Magazine has described John 3:16—For God so loved the world that he gave his one and only Son, that whoever believes in him shall not perish but have eternal life.—as "one of the most famous and well-known Bible verses.  It has been called the 'Gospel in a nutshell' because it is considered a summary of the central doctrines of Christianity" [33].  The verb translated ‘love’ in this verse is agapao.
Agape has been expounded on by many Christian writers in a specifically Christian context.  C. S. Lewis, in his book “The Four Loves”, used agape to describe what he believed was the highest level of love known to humanity—a selfless love, a love that was passionately committed to the well-being of the other. [34]
The Christian usage of the term agape comes almost directly from the canonical Gospels' accounts of the teachings of Jesus.  When asked what the greatest commandment was, Jesus said, “’Love [agape] the Lord your God with all your heart and with all your soul and with all your mind.’  This is the first and greatest commandment.  And the second is like it: ‘Love [agape] your neighbor as yourself.’  All the Law and the Prophets hang on these two commandments.” [5]  (Matthew 22:37-40, NIV)

Truth should cover everything and for everyone in an acceptable manner—in a perfect world!  It should be pleasing and liberating and address everyone's most intimate selves and guide us all towards a splendid union; a new life all-together.  But there is more.  Truth should not describe the universe and all its contents, because that would require some kind of media in which Truth is expressed, which can therefore not be part of it.  And Truth cannot be displayed by anything that is not Truth itself.  Truth therefore should be some kind of presentation that works like the universe, the universe's principles clearly embedded in the presentation as they are within every atom and all structures formed by them.  Truth—by far the most unusual entity in the universe—should be mental (or spiritual) since it will serve as core to a mental realm, and it should be connected to a code of some sort, just like the mind of man is connected to the human genome.  
The most obvious answer is that the nucleic Truth that will be seated in the Universal Set level 4 is Jesus Christ.  The ‘code’ connected to Him, which summarizes Him the very way we are summarized in our genome, is the Bible.  We have proof of this.  Proof is submitted in the chapters to come.  Yet, the point is that the universe behaves like the Truth, like Christ.
Why is this so important that we would waste tons of bytes and your valuable time?  The answer is as grim as it is simple.  If we can translate the Gospel in the language the world speaks (Math; science) and show the world where we (as a species) will ‘evolve’ to, and that the ‘missing’ nucleus is not missing at all, we will find peace as a species—when all biblical prophecy is fulfilled.  Though this will not appear until the return of Christ, most of us will find that worth investigating.  So let us.
This concludes our Introduction to Chaos Theory
 
Inductive reasoning
- A Reason to Reason -
I am convinced that it is impossible to expound the methods of induction in a sound manner, without resting them upon the theory of probability.  Perfect knowledge alone can give certainty, and in nature perfect knowledge would be infinite knowledge, which is clearly beyond our capacities.  We have, therefore, to content ourselves with partial knowledge—knowledge mingled with ignorance, producing doubt. 
- William Stanley Jevons
What hadn't been realized in the literature until now is that merely to describe how severely something has been tested in the past itself embodies inductive assumptions, even as a statement about the past. 
- Robert Nozick 
The only hope [of science] ... is in genuine induction. 
- Sir Francis Bacon
The only hope for science
Inductive reasoning, also known as induction or inductive logic, or ‘educated guess’ in colloquial English, is a kind of reasoning that constructs or evaluates inductive arguments.  The premises of an inductive logical argument indicate some degree of support (inductive probability) for the conclusion, but do not entail it; that is; they suggest truth but do not ensure it.
Induction is employed, for example, in the following argument:
Every life form we know of depends on liquid water to exist.
All life depends on liquid water to exist.
Inductive reasoning allows for the possibility that the conclusion is false, even where all of the premises are true. [35] For example:
All of the swans we have seen are white.
All swans are white.
Note that this definition of inductive reasoning excludes mathematical induction, which is considered a form of deductive reasoning.
Strong and weak induction
The words ‘strong’ and ‘weak’ are sometimes used to praise or demean the goodness of an inductive argument.  The idea is that you say, “This is an example of strong induction”, when you would decide to believe the conclusion if presented with the premises.  Alternatively, you say, “That is weak induction”, when your particular worldview does not allow you to see that the conclusions are likely given the premises.
Strong induction
We describe the rate of fall of all objects we have observed by the equation, F=G ((m_1 m_2 ))⁄r^2 .  That is, “the gravitational force between two objects equals the gravitational constant, times the product of the masses divided by the distance between them squared”.  This represents Newton’s second law of motion.
Therefore:
The gravitational force between two objects equals the gravitational constant times, the product of the masses divided by the distance between them squared.  Given the premise, we cannot be absolutely certain about the conclusion of this argument.  At speeds we normally experience, Newtonian  mechanics holds quite well.  However, at speeds approaching that of light, the Newtonian system  is not accurate, and the conclusion in that case would be false.  (Sir Isaac Newton pictured here [6].)  However, in most cases that we experience, the premise, as stated, would usually lead to the conclusion.  Therefore, we are ‘logical’ in calling this argument an instance of strong induction. 
Weak induction
Consider this example:
I always hang pictures on nails.
Therefore:
All pictures hang from nails.
Here, the link between the premise and the conclusion is very weak.  Not only is it possible for the conclusion to be false given the premise, it is likely that the conclusion is false.  Not all pictures are hung from nails; moreover, not all pictures are hung.  Thus, we say that this argument is an instance of weak induction.
Is induction reliable?
Inductive reasoning has been attacked for millennia by thinkers as diverse as Sextus Empiricus [36] and Karl Popper. [37]
The classic philosophical treatment of the problem of induction was given by the Scottish philosopher David Hume (pictured here [6]).  Hume argued that our everyday functioning depends on drawing uncertain conclusions from our relatively limited experiences.  This is in contrasts to depending on deductively valid arguments.  For example, we believe that bread will nourish us because it has done so in the past, despite no guarantee that it will do so.  However, Hume argued that it is impossible to justify inductive reasoning.  Inductive reasoning certainly cannot be justified deductively, and so our only option is to justify it inductively.  However, to justify induction inductively is circular.  Therefore, it is impossible to justify induction [35].
Nevertheless, Hume immediately argued that even if induction were proved unreliable, we would have to rely on it.  Therefore, he took a middle road.  Rather than approach everything with severe skepticism, Hume advocated a practical skepticism, based on common sense, where the inevitability of induction is accepted [35].
PROBLEMS OF INDUCTION
The problem of induction is the philosophical question of whether inductive reasoning leads to knowledge.  That is, what is the justification for…?
1.	Generalizing about the properties of a class of objects based on some number of observations of particular instances of that class (for example, the inference that “all swans we have seen are white, and therefore all swans are white,” before the discovery of black swans) or
2.	Presupposing that a sequence of events in the future will occur as it always has in the past (for example, the laws of physics will hold as they have always been observed to hold).  Hume called this the Principle of Uniformity of Nature. [38]
3.	The problem calls into question all empirical claims made in everyday life or through the scientific method.  Although the problem arguably dates back to the Pyrrhonism of ancient philosophy, David Hume introduced it in the mid-18th century, with the most notable response provided by Karl Popper [39] two centuries later.  A more recent, probability-based extension is the "no-free-lunch theorem for supervised learning" of Wolpert and Macready.
Bias
Inductive reasoning is also known as hypothesis construction; we base any conclusions we make on educated predictions.  There are three biases that could distort the proper application of induction.  This could prevent the reasoner from forming the best, most logical conclusion based on the clues.  These biases include the availability bias, the confirmation bias, and the predictable-world bias.
With the availability bias, the reasoner must primarily depend on information that is readily available to him.  People have a tendency to rely on information that is easily accessible in the world around them.  For example, in a survey, people are asked to estimate the percentage of people who died from various causes.  Most respondents would choose the causes that have been most prevalent in the media, such as terrorism, and murders, and airplane accidents.  They choose these rather than causes such as disease and traffic accidents, which have been technically ‘less accessible’ to the individual, since they are not emphasized as heavily in the world around him/her.
The confirmation bias is based on the natural tendency to confirm rather than to deny a current hypothesis.  Research has demonstrated that people are inclined to seek solutions to problems that are more consistent with known hypotheses, rather than attempt to refute those hypotheses.  Often, in experiments, researchers will ask questions that seek answers that fit established hypotheses, thus confirming these hypotheses.  For example, if we hypothesize that Evie  is a sociable individual, researchers will naturally ask questions that seek to confirm the premise that Evie is in fact a sociable individual.  The main reason that people exhibit this type of bias is because it is simply more pleasing to hear “yes” rather than “no.”  Because of this, people will resort to the confirmation bias and will reason in ways that elicit agreement.  The tendency to accept and stick with current hypotheses has often proven more advantageous than attempting to deny the current hypotheses.
The predictable-world bias revolves around the inclination to perceive order where it has not been proved to exist.  A major aspect of this bias is probability.  Gambling, for example, is one of the most obvious forms of predictable-world bias.  Gamblers often begin to think that they see patterns in the outcomes and, therefore, believe that they are able to predict outcomes based upon what they have witnessed.  In reality, however, the outcomes of these games are always entirely random¬¬—as long as the games are not ‘fixed’—and the probability of winning is very small.  There is no visible order.  Since people constantly seek some type of order to explain human experiences, it is difficult for people to acknowledge that visible order may be nonexistent (remember Chaos theory) [40].
Types of inductive reasoning
Generalization
A generalization (more accurately, an inductive generalization) proceeds from a premise about a sample to a conclusion about the population.
The proportion Q of the sample (from the population) has attribute A.
Therefore:
The proportion Q of the population has attribute A.
Example
There are 20 balls—either black or white—in an urn.  To estimate their respective numbers, you draw a sample of four balls and find that three are black and one is white.  A good inductive generalization would be that there are 15 black, and five white, balls in the urn.
How much the premises support the conclusion depends upon (a) the number in the sample group compared to the number in the population and (b) the degree to which the sample represents the population (which may be achieved by taking a random sample).  The hasty generalization and the biased sample are generalization fallacies.
Statistical syllogism
A statistical syllogism proceeds from a generalization to a conclusion about an individual.
A proportion Q of population P has attribute A.
An individual Joe is a member of P.
Therefore:
There is a probability which corresponds to the proportion Q that Joe has attribute A.
The proportion in the first premise would be something like ‘3/5ths of", ‘all’, ‘few’, etc.  Two deductive fallacies can occur in statistical syllogisms: accident and converse accident.
Simple induction
Simple induction proceeds from a premise about a sample group to a conclusion about another individual.
Proportion Q of the known instances of population P has attribute A.
Individual Debby is another member of P.
Therefore:
There is a probability corresponding to Q that Debby has attribute A.
This is a combination of a generalization and a statistical syllogism, where the conclusion of the generalization is also the first premise of the statistical syllogism.
Argument from analogy
Some philosophers believe that an argument from analogy is a kind of inductive reasoning.
An argument from analogy has the following form:
Debbie has attributes A, B, and C
Joe has attributes A and B
So, Joe has attribute C
An analogy relies on the inference that the attributes known to be shared (the similarities) imply that C is also a shared property.  The support, which the premises provide for the conclusion, is dependent upon the relevance and number of the similarities between Debbie and Joe.   The fallacy related to this process is false analogy.  As with other forms of inductive argument, even the best reasoning in an argument from analogy can only make the conclusion probable given the truth of the premises, not certain.
Analogical reasoning is very frequent in common sense, science, philosophy and the humanities, but sometimes it is accepted only as an auxiliary method.  A refined approach is case-based reasoning.  For more information on inferences by analogy, see Juthe, 2005. [41]
Causal inference
A causal inference draws a conclusion about a causal connection based on the conditions of the occurrence of an effect.  Premises about the correlation of two things can indicate a causal relationship between them, but additional factors must be confirmed to establish the exact form of the causal relationship.
Prediction
A prediction draws a conclusion about a future individual from a past sample.
Proportion Q of observed members of group G have had attribute A.
Therefore:
There is a probability corresponding to Q that other members of group G will have attribute A when next observed.
Bayesian inference
Of the candidate systems for an inductive logic, the most influential is Bayesianism, named after Thomas Bayes  (right [6]).  As a logic of induction, rather than a theory of belief, Bayesianism does not determine which beliefs are a priori rational.  rather  it determines how we should rationally change the beliefs we have when presented with evidence.  We begin by committing to a (any) hypothesis, and when faced with evidence, we adjust the strength of our belief in that hypothesis in a precise manner using Bayesian logic. 
Inductive inference
Around 1960, Ray Solomonoff created the theory of universal inductive inference, the theory of prediction based on observations.  For example, one could predict the next symbol based upon a given series of symbols.  This is a mathematically formalized Occam's Razor .  Fundamental ingredients of the theory are the concepts of algorithmic probability and Kolmogorov complexity.
 
BAYESIAN PROBABILITY
Bayesian probability is one of the different interpretations of the concept of probability.  It belongs to the category of evidential probabilities.  One can view the Bayesian interpretation of probability as an extension of logic, which enables reasoning with uncertain statements.  To evaluate the probability of a hypothesis, the Bayesian probabilist specifies some prior probability, which is then updated in the light of new relevant data.  The Bayesian interpretation provides a standard set of procedures and formulae to perform this calculation.  Bayesian probability interprets the concept of probability as "a measure of a state of knowledge" [42], in contrast to interpreting it as a frequency or a ‘propensity’ of some phenomenon.
Bayesian refers to the 18th century mathematician and theologian Thomas Bayes (1702–1761), who provided the first mathematical treatment of a non-trivial problem of Bayesian inference [43].  Nevertheless, the French mathematician Pierre-Simon Laplace (1749–1827) pioneered and popularized what is now called Bayesian probability [43].
Broadly speaking, there are two views on Bayesian probability, which interpret the state of knowledge concept in different ways.  According to the objectivist view, one can justify the rules of Bayesian statistics by requirements of rationality and consistency and can interpret them as an extension of logic [42] [43].  According to the subjectivist view, the state of knowledge measures a ‘personal belief’ [44].  Bayesian principles are the basis for many modern machine-learning methods [45].  In the Bayesian view, one assigns a probability to a hypothesis.  In contrast, under the frequentist view, one typically tests a hypothesis without an assigned probability.
 
“I suppose it may be of use to prevail with the busy mind of man, to be more cautious in meddling with things exceeding its comprehension; to stop when it is at the utmost extent of its tether; and to sit down in a quiet ignorance of those things, which, upon examination, are found to be beyond the reach of our capacities.  We should not then perhaps be so forward, out of an affectation of an universal knowledge, to raise questions, and perplex ourselves and others with disputes about things, to which our understandings are not suited; and of which we cannot frame in our minds any clear or distinct perceptions, or whereof (as it has perhaps too often happened) we have not any notions at all.” [46]
- John Locke

 
Inductive Reasoning and the Biblical Model
- Scripture is a priori  -
The deductive method is the mode of using knowledge, and the inductive method the mode of acquiring it. 
	Henry Mayhew 
First Principles
As I have stated from the start, faith for me is a priori—and the Biblical model—and all else that is real for me flows from it.  There are different models to believe in, and these models may not always be the same, or even comparable.  People like to think that the scientific model consists of absolute truth, but no, even the scientific model is just a tool, and accepting it requires faith just as much as accepting the Biblical model.  I think that someday the scientific model and the Biblical model will be found at odds.  I also think that science itself will one day conclude that the Bible is truer than science.  But, that day has not yet come.
Literary Theory
Literary theory in a strict sense is the systematic study of the nature of literature and of the methods for analyzing literature.  However, literary scholarship since the 19th century often includes—in addition to, or even instead of literary theory in the strict sense—considerations of intellectual history, moral philosophy, social prophecy, and other interdisciplinary themes that are of relevance to the way humans interpret meaning.  In humanities in modern academia, the latter style of scholarship is an outgrowth of critical theory and is often simply called ‘theory.’ [47] Consequently, the word ‘theory’ has become an umbrella term for a variety of scholarly approaches to reading texts. 
When we include the Bible under the category of literature—and it is in the strictest sense—then Literary theory applies to the Bible.  I will also argue that the Bible is much more than literature—the Word of Truth—but to some people it is just literature.
Coherence theory of truth
For coherence theories in general, truth requires a proper fit of elements within a whole system.  Very often, though, coherence is taken to imply something more than simple logical consistency; often there is a demand that the propositions in a coherent system lend mutual inferential support to each other.  So, for example, the completeness and comprehensiveness of the underlying set of concepts is a critical factor in judging the validity and usefulness of a coherent system .  A pervasive tenet of coherence theories is the idea that truth is primarily a property of whole systems of propositions, and can be ascribed to individual propositions only according to their coherence with the whole.  Among the assortment of perspectives commonly regarded as coherence theory, theorists differ on the question of whether coherence entails many possible true systems of thought or only a single absolute system.
Some variants of coherence theory claim to characterize the essential and intrinsic properties of formal systems in logic and mathematics. [48] However, formal reasoners are content to contemplate axiomatically independent and sometimes mutually contradictory systems side by side, for example, the various alternative geometries.  Overall, coherence theories have been criticized as lacking justification in their application to other areas of truth.  This is especially the case with respect to assertions about the natural world, empirical data in general, assertions about practical matters of psychology and society, especially when used without support from the other major theories of truth. [48]
 
Coherence theories distinguish the thought of rationalist philosophers, particularly of Spinoza, Leibniz, and G. W. F. Hegel  (pictured here [6]), along with the British philosopher F. H. Bradley. [48] They have found resurgence also among several proponents of logical positivism, notably Otto Neurath and Carl Hempel. 
Scripture Theory
Scripture Theory is to biblical texts what Chaos Theory is to creation.  Scripture Theory tries to isolate patterns in the narrative, in order to understand it better and to arrive at some kind of system that describes the principles of a text’s governing dynamics within the context of Scripture as a whole.  It is a holistic approach to context, understanding that God cannot contradict Himself, and if Scripture is truly His written Word, then there are no contradictions in it!  The difference between a book and a great book is often the coherency and consistency of patterns in the latter.  [49] One’s Scripture Theory leads to one’s Biblical model.
The Biblical Model
The Biblical model is not universal—my Biblical model is just one of many.  The Biblical model I have in mind is one based on Scripture theory, and I have derived it from many hours of deliberate and methodical study of Scripture.  The model has the following components:
	The Bible is holistic.  Each passage is part of a book, each book is part of a division or testament, and each testament makes up the whole.  If my Biblical model is missing one passage, the model breaks down.  If one adds to Scripture, then my model breaks down again. 
	Autographs—the original source documents—are inerrant, not translations and manuscripts (codexes ).  The books of the Bible attributed to Paul were letters written to churches (e.g., Ephesus) or individuals (e.g., Timothy), authored or dictated by Paul and written in Koine Greek.  The original records have long since vanished from existence.  Bible translations (e.g., NASB) are based on fragments of copied text that have been compiled into manuscripts.  Manuscripts are not inerrant, and even if they were, translations are subject to transliteration errors, contextual errors, cultural biases, etc.  However, it is important to remember:
“Above all, you must understand that no prophecy of Scripture came about by the prophet’s own interpretation of things.  For prophecy never had its origin in the human will, but prophets, though human, spoke from God as they were carried along by the Holy Spirit.” [1]
-2 Peter 1:20-21 (NASB)
	The Holy Spirit (HS) transcends errors.  Errors do not pose obstacles to the HS, and it is the HS that provides correct interpretation as we study a translation or manuscript of the inerrant autographs.  In fact, even if the autographs had errors, they would not prevent the HS from providing correct, inerrant interpretation of God’s Word—the logos, the personification of God’s Word—Christ.
	Context is king!  Every verse in the Bible has a context, within the larger whole—paragraph, chapter, etc.—as does every book.  Proper application and correct interpretation depends on the context holistically—literally, culturally, linguistically, semiotically, etc.  Translations my not accurately portray the context for linguistic, semiotic, and cultural standpoints.  Hence, one must carefully study the original culture, language, and symbols.  In interpreting Scripture, there is both an immediate context and a broader context.  The immediate context of a verse is the paragraph (or paragraphs) or the biblical book in question.  One should always consult the immediate context when interpreting Bible verses.  The broader context is the whole of Scripture.  The entire Scripture is the context and guide for understanding particular passages of Scripture.  We must keep in mind that the interpretation of a specific passage must not contradict the total teaching of Scripture on a point.  Individual verses do not exist as isolated fragments, but as parts of a whole.  The exposition of these verses, therefore, must involve exhibiting them in right relation both to the whole and to each other.  “Scripture interprets Scripture.”  As J. I. Packer puts it, “if we would understand the parts, our wisest course is to get to know the whole.” [50]
	There is only one correct interpretation of Scripture.  Though there may be many applications in one verse of Scripture, there is one and only one correct interpretation.  Interpretation is an extraction of the author’s meaning, a correct conception of behavior, and a correct rendering of the dynamics.  Interpretation rarely jumps out from the page at first glance—unless the HS supernaturally provides it.  There are more than just words on a page in Scripture; though some are static, many are dynamic—and we will latter see that behavior of a thing is more important than the thing in Hebrew.  Paul implores Timothy to “righty dividing the word of truth.”  (2 Timothy 2:15) [some versions use accurately or correctly handling.]
	The Bible never contradicts itself.  A seemingly contradictory statement is probably an interpretation taken out of context, or a misinterpretation, both of which violate the Biblical model.  “O Timothy!  Guard what was committed to your trust, avoiding the profane and idle babblings and contradictions of what is falsely called knowledge—by professing it some have strayed concerning the faith.” [31] (1 Timothy 6:20-21) Paul did not mean that the Bible contradicts itself when he wrote this to Timothy, but it seems clear that there are others who do create ‘contradictions', but these were not committed to Timothy’s trust, as Truth was.
	Presuppositions must be suppressed.  Principle (10a) states, “Our beliefs are not valid instruments to analyze either reality in general or any specific pattern.”  Beliefs and faith are not the same things.  Belief is the psychological state in which an individual holds a proposition or premise to be true [51].  We can “learn” or inherent our beliefs from a theological position (Calvinism, Catholicism, neo-Orthodoxy, etc.), and from secular positions (science, sociology, psychology, etc.).  Some of our beliefs may be ‘valid’ and others might fly in the face of the Spirit—they might be absolutely wrong, even if we learned in Sunday School!  In inductive Bible study, we must honestly put aside our presuppositions and approach Scripture afresh.
	The Bible is literature and correct Genre Judgment  is called for.  A ‘literal’ approach to Scripture recognizes that the Bible contains a variety of literary genres, each of which has certain peculiar characteristics that one must recognize in order to interpret the text properly.  Biblical genres include the historical (e.g., Acts), the dramatic epic (e.g., Job), poetry (e.g., Psalms), wise sayings (e.g., Proverbs), and apocalyptic writings (e.g., Revelation).  Obviously, an incorrect genre judgment will lead one astray in interpreting Scripture.  A parable should not be treated as history, nor should poetry or apocalyptic literature (both of which contain many symbols) be treated as straightforward narrative.  The wise interpreter allows knowledge of genres to influence how he or she approaches individual biblical texts, to determine accurately what the biblical author was intending to communicate.  Even though the Bible contains a variety of literary genres and many figures of speech, the biblical authors most often employed literal statements to convey their ideas.  Where they use a literal means to express their ideas, the Bible expositor must employ a corresponding means to explain these ideas—namely, a literal approach.  A literal method of interpreting Scripture gives to each word in the text the same basic meaning it would have in normal, ordinary, customary usage—whether employed in writing, speaking, or thinking.  
	Historical considerations are especially important in properly interpreting the Word of God.  The Christian faith is based on historical fact.  Indeed, Christianity rests on the foundation of the historical Jesus, whose earthly life represents God’s full and objective self-communication to humankind (John 1:18).  Human beings saw and heard Jesus as God’s ultimate revelation (1 John 1:1-3).  This is why He could forcefully claim, “If ye had known me, ye should have known my Father also”. [8] (John 14:7)  The apostle Paul, when speaking with the religious men of Athens, affirmed that the reality of the future judgment of all humanity rests on the objective, historical evidence for the resurrection of Jesus (Acts 17:16f.).  New Testament writers recorded this evidence for us in the Gospels; their accounts were eyewitness testimony and they wrote very close in time to the events on which they report.  Based on how people respond to God’s objective, historical revelation contained in Scripture, they will spend eternity in a real heaven or a real hell.
	One must use proper methodology when interpreting the Bible.  The word ‘method’ comes from the Greek word methodos, which literally means ‘a way or path of transit’.  Methodology in Bible study is therefore concerned with ‘taking the proper path in order to arrive at Scriptural truth’.  This implies that improper paths can be taken.  Of course, proper methodology is essential to many fields of endeavor.  A heart surgeon does not perform open-heart surgery without following proper, objective methodology.  (Would you trust a heart surgeon to operate on you who told you that he intended to discard objective methodology, and instead opting for a subjective approach?—cutting you where he feels like cutting you.)  Improper methodology in interpreting Scripture is nothing new.  Even in New Testament times, the apostle Peter warned that there are teachings in the inspired writings of Paul “which the untaught and unstable distort, as they do also the rest of the Scriptures, to their own destruction” [8] (2 Peter 3:16, NASB).  This verse tells us that mishandling the Word of God can be very dangerous.  Indeed, mishandling the Word of God is a ‘path’ to destruction.  Contrary to the practices of some false teachers in Corinth, the apostle Paul assured his readers that he faithfully handled the Word of God (2 Corinthians 4:2).  Paul admonished young Timothy to follow his example: “Study to show thyself approved unto God, a workman that needeth not to be ashamed, rightly dividing the word of truth” [8] (2 Timothy 2:15, KJV).
The Biblical model and Quantum Physics
Matter is made up of what atoms and molecules are made of, meaning anything made of protons, neutrons, and electrons. [52] As an analogy, Scripture (matter) is made up of molecules (history, poems, epistles, etc.), which comprise of paragraphs (atoms), which consist of sentences and words (sub-atomic particles), held together by rules of grammar (quantum foam and forces).  If you leave out a sentence (electron), the atom changes, which changes the molecule, which changes the matter.  Proper interpretation requires looking at the whole of Scripture, guided by the Holy Spirit.
Pauli’s Exclusion Principle states that two electrons that have identical values for their four characteristics cannot occupy the same sphere around the nucleus.  In a manner, two interpretations of a verse in Scripture cannot occupy the sphere around truth—the Word of Truth.  The Word of Truth is comprised of pieces of truth obtained through Scripture, and a piece of truth derived from the same element (e.g., a verse) that has two interpretations is not a piece truth—only one correct interpretation leads to Truth.
Matter does not annihilate itself.  This requires antimatter—an electron colliding with a positron.  In a like manner, Scripture does not contradict itself.  This would require anti-truth, and the two would ‘annihilate each other’.  When Scripture appears to contain contradictions, it is usually due to interpreting out of context.
As gravity is the king of the universe, context is the king of interpretation!  Gravity is the only force to which all particles are subjected.  Interpretation must be subjected to context.
Some real geniuses, like Heisenberg and Schrödinger, could probably pick up a quantum physics book—assuming they do not yet know any quantum physics—read a paragraph or two and immediately understand its meaning.  I cannot do likewise.  For me, it takes many hours of deliberate, methodical study.  The same is true for Scripture.  There are some days when you look at a verse, and the Spirit instantly reveals its meaning—its correct interpretation.  That seldom happens for me.  I have to approach the study of Scripture methodically.
Number	Bible Model Principle
Quantum Analogy
15a	The Bible is holistic.
(10b) Truth is a pattern that is confirmed by all elements that make it up or are covered by it
15b	Autographs are inerrant, not translations and manuscripts.
Contrapositive: (9) No logical system will ever be able to present fully the Truth about the Universe.

15c	The Holy Spirit transcends errors.	(6a) The universe is the only thing with an inside and no outside.
15d	Context is king
(13) Gravity is king

15e	There is only one correct interpretation of Scripture
(3) Pauli’s Exclusion Principle

15f	The Bible never contradicts itself.	(4d) Particles and antiparticles are identical except the electrical charges are reversed.  When particle and anti-particle meet, they annihilate.

15g	Presuppositions must be suppressed.	(10a) Our beliefs are not valid instruments to analyze either reality in general or any specific pattern.
(10c) Truth can only be noticed when the private perspective is doubted.
15h	The Bible is literature and correct Genre Judgment is called for.
(17) In Hebrew Scriptures, and all models derived thereof, entities are reckoned solely after their behavior and not after their appearance.
15i	Historical considerations often reveal patterns and are especially important in proper interpretation.	(8a) Self-similarity is the repetition of a shape, form or behavior on different levels of complexity.  Not as an identical copy, but a variation of the same basic shape.
(6b) All particles were created at The Beginning.  Nucleosynthesis makes new atomic nuclei from pre-existing nucleons.

15j	One must use proper methodology when interpreting the Bible.  
(1) Individual quantum particles are subjected to a completely different law than the law to which large objects made from quantum particles are subjected.
Exegesis
Exegesis (from the Greek ἐξήγησις from ἐξηγεῖσθαι ‘to lead out’) is a critical explanation or interpretation of a text, especially a religious text.  Traditionally the term was used primarily for exegesis of the Bible; however, in contemporary usage, it has broadened to mean a critical explanation of any text, and the term ‘Biblical exegesis’ is used for greater specificity.  The goal of Biblical exegesis is to explore the meaning of the text that then leads to discovering its significance or relevance.
Exegesis includes a wide range of critical disciplines: textual criticism  is the investigation into the history and origins of the text, but exegesis may include the study of the historical and cultural backgrounds for the author, the text, and the original audience.  Other analysis includes classification of the type of literary genres present in the text, and an analysis of grammatical and syntactical features in the text itself.
The terms exegesis and hermeneutics have been used interchangeably.  However, hermeneutics is a more widely defined discipline of interpretation theory: hermeneutics includes the entire framework of the interpretive process, encompassing all forms of communication: written, verbal and nonverbal, while exegesis focuses primarily on the written text.
Inductive Method of Bible Study—Exegesis 
No one particular thing sets inductive Bible study apart from the study of the Bible as it is conducted by many intelligent laypersons, pastors, and biblical scholars (‘exegetes’) around the world.  For example, inductive Bible study shares with responsible exegesis everywhere a concern for literary context, and for the precise meaning of biblical terms derived through proper word study.  The distinctiveness of inductive Bible study involves its radical openness to the meaning of the biblical text wherever the evidence may lead, its methodological emphases, and the intentional way in which it seeks to relate the various components of Bible study to one another.  Consequently, we should consider the history of inductive Bible study as part of the church’s ongoing attempt to understand its scriptures well.
Harper and White
The Inductive Bible Study movement began with the work of William Rainey Harper (below left [6])  and especially the work of his student and associate, Wilbert Webster White (below right [6]).
        
Wilbert Webster White was born in Wooster, Ohio, in 1863, into a pious Presbyterian family.  White graduated from the College of Wooster with distinction in 1883, and upon his graduation from Xenia Theological Seminary in 1885, he served pastorates in the United Presbyterian Church. 
While a seminary student, White participated in summer school classes at Morgan Park Theological Seminary, where he came under the instruction of William Rainey Harper.  Harper was most impressed with White’s intellectual gifts and persuaded him to leave the pastorate for the pursuit of doctoral studies in Semitic languages at Yale University, with a view toward his eventually becoming a professor of Old Testament.
Through a number of influences at Yale, White became interested in exploring the process of learning—the educational method.  Later, White and the seminary he founded would develop a fruitful conversation with a great teacher and educational theorist from New York University, Herman Harrell Horne.  During this period, too, White became convinced of the significance of relationships; he came to see that the key to understanding anything is to consider its major components and the ways in which these components relate to one another. 
Under Harper, White encountered higher-critical study of the Bible.  In fact, Harper’s critical views, particularly on the dating and authorship of the Pentateuch, were met with suspicion by many of his fellow Baptists.  White was not convinced of Harper’s views regarding some of these issues.  But, Harper acknowledged the limits of this critical study of the Bible; and White appreciated Harper’s recognition that the study of the Bible must not be reduced to matters of authorship or sources. 
White also appreciated Harper’s insistence that, generally speaking, the emphasis should be upon the study of the Bible in the student’s own language; for Harper recognized that people think in their native language, and that consequently students should be saturated with the Bible in their own tongue.  Indeed, Harper and White believed that the excitement that comes from the study of the Bible in the vernacular would lead many students to pursue enthusiastically the original languages.  Thus, as White was struggling with Harper’s presentation of higher-critical views he also encountered, through Harper, “the method of the study of the Bible by books in the mother tongue,” as he would later put it.
Both Harper and White believed that the suspicions or doubts regarding the Bible that emerged from higher-critical study could be adequately addressed by the direct literary study of the Bible.  They believed that as the student encountered the message of the Bible by examining the Bible book-by-book, the student would experience the compelling force and authenticity of the Bible; in the process of pursuing its proper study readers would find that the Bible authenticates itself.
In his classes, Harper combined detailed critical study of minute points with the holistic study of whole biblical books or groups of books in the mother tongue.  In other words, Harper balanced a deductive approach that presented scholarly opinions to the student to impose these upon the text, with an inductive approach that involved students immersing themselves in the observation of the text with a view towards drawing their own conclusions regarding its meaning. 
Upon earning his Ph.D. in Semitics from Yale University, White joined the faculty of Xenia Seminary.  However, White had been profoundly influenced by Harper; and he consequently felt constrained by the stilted, doctrinaire character of this traditional ‘old-line’ denominational seminary.  At Xenia a deductive approach was practiced, in which students were spoon-fed information and told what to think, over against an inductive approach that would give students the resources and encouragement to discover truth, and especially biblical truth, for themselves. 
While teaching at Xenia White continued Harper’s practice of giving over a portion of his instruction in courses in Hebrew and Old Testament literature to the study of larger swaths of the English Bible.  During his years of teaching at Xenia, White was also exposed to Andrew Murray’s book, “With Christ in the School of Prayer”.  Out of that encounter, White experienced a deeper level of spiritual intimacy with Christ.  White became convinced that seminary education must not only center on the study of the Bible, but that it must also facilitate authentic spiritual formation.
White’s disillusionment with traditional seminary education, such as he experienced at Xenia, led him to leave Xenia to accept an invitation from Dwight Moody to teach at Moody’s recently inaugurated Bible college in Chicago.  There White came to appreciate the value of a learning environment.  But White chafed under what he considered a lack of intellectual rigor and a superficial spirituality.  He became convinced that a great need existed for a new type of seminary, one that would serve as an alternative to the traditional seminary that lacked curricular coherence around the centrality of an inductive study of the Bible, and an alternative to the Bible colleges, which, at least at that time, were characterized, by obscurantism and academic weakness.
It was during this period that his brother, J. Campbell White, on behalf of the International Committee of the YMCA, invited Wilbert W. White to go with him working among college students in Calcutta, India.  There White became convinced of the need, also in India, for knowledge of the Bible and for right method to study and teach it.  White taught at United Presbyterian mission stations in India; and he held fourteen conventions attended by missionaries and college students from all over India.  Missionaries and Indian students alike expressed the need for an emphasis on the direct study of the Bible and a method that would make such study fruitful.
On his return trip, White stopped in England, where he presented Bible studies in the YWCA in London.  When he came back to England the next year (1899), he taught over 12,000 people in his ten-week Bible studies in London.  He returned for a third series of meetings in March 1900, when he gave studies in England, Northern Ireland, and Scotland.  At this time, White presented a plan to Lord Overtoun for a school modeled on the Teacher’s College at Columbia University, but with a Bible-centered curriculum.  Overtoun gave White 500 pounds to establish such a school in America, with the hope that White would establish a similar school in London.  The hope of a London school was never realized; but the American school would become The Biblical Seminary in New York.
The Biblical Seminary in New York
On October 29, 1900, the first public meeting was held in connection with the ‘Bible Teachers College’.  Classes began on January 8, 1901 in Montclair, New Jersey.  The school moved to Manhattan in 1902 (where it was eventually located in a 12-story building on East 49th Street) and in 1921 the name was changed to The Biblical Seminary in New York.  The seminary was fully accredited by the Board of Regents of the University of the State of New York. 
The purpose of the school was “to make the study of the Bible in the mother tongue the organizing, dominating element in a school of preparation for Christian leadership.”  C.R. Eberhardt noted in his book, The Bible in the Making of Ministers, that it was established out of the conviction “that the ministry must be a bibliocracy, that it must know its Bible better than any other book.” [53] Eberhardt’s book is the most authoritative account of the work of W. W. White and the beginnings of the inductive Bible study movement.  The school would chart a course between the fundamentalism of inerrancy and the fundamentalism of higher-critical dogma.  The school was to emphasize that the Scripture itself must be allowed to establish its own criteria both as to its interpretation and its authority. 
The seminary reflected the emphases of Wilbert W. White: (1) a biblio-centric curriculum around the inductive study of the Bible in the vernacular; (2) concern for effective educational principles and practices to facilitate the student’s own learning; (3) commitment to the devotional life of prayer toward spiritual maturity; (4) a cosmopolitan, global perspective; and (5) commitment to evangelical Christianity and especially the authority of the scriptures.
The Biblical Seminary in New York flourished under the presidency of Wilbert W. White, who died in 1944, and his immediate successors.  Inductive biblical study was developed and enhanced there through such teachers as Howard Tillman Kuist  (below left [6]); Donald G. Miller  (below right [6]); and Robert A. Traina.  Traina developed the relationship between inductive Bible study and traditional exegesis and became Vice President for Academic Affairs and the F. M. Ada Thompson Professor of English Bible at Asbury Theological Seminary. 
         
Several significant Christian leaders were to graduate from The Biblical Seminary, including the noted Christian philosopher Jerry Gill, Pat Robertson, and Eugene Peterson.  The inductive approach has influenced many scholars of global recognition, including Brevard Childs, James Luther Mays and Patrick D. Miller, Jr., and William J. Abraham.  The inductive approach has also become central in the teaching of organizations such as InterVarsity Christian Fellowship and Youth With a Mission.  Perhaps the center of serious work in inductive Bible study today is Asbury Theological Seminary, which has a department of Inductive Bible Study in which are housed six full-time faculty.
To some degree, what you are told inductive Bible study means will depend upon which theologian you are asking.  But fundamentally it is a term of logic which means, interpreting scripture with no pre-judgment or presupposition, by the text itself, through analyzing the evidence and drawing out of it logical conclusions.  Biblical Induction literally means 'out of', or ‘introduced from the Bible’.  The Bible is the source of specifics from which one derives general evidence—and thus doctrine.

 
The Inductive Method for Beginners
- “Linguistic Math” using the Bible as Data Set –
The folly of Interpreters has been, to foretell times and things by this Prophecy, as if God designed to make them Prophets.  By this rashness they have not only exposed themselves, but brought the Prophecy also into contempt.  The design of God was much otherwise.  He gave this and the Prophecies of the Old Testament, not to gratify men’s curiosities by enabling them to foreknow things, but that after they were fulfilled they might be interpreted by the event, and his own Providence, not the Interpreters, be then manifested thereby to the world.  For the event of things predicted many ages before will then be a convincing argument that the world is governed by Providence.  For, as the few and obscure prophecies concerning Christ's first coming were for setting up the Christian religion, which many nations have since corrupted, so the many and clear prophecies concerning the things to be done at Christ's second coming, are not only for predicting, but for effecting a recovery and re-establishment of the long lost truth, and setting up a kingdom where righteousness dwells.  The event will prove the Apocalypse; and this prophecy, thus proved and understood, will open the old Prophets, and altogether will make known the true religion and establish it.  There is already so much of this prophecy fulfilled, that, as many as will take pains in this study, may see sufficient instances of God's providence; but then the signal revolutions, predicted by all the holy Prophets, will at once both turn men's eyes upon considering the predictions, and plainly interpret them.  Till that period, we must content ourselves with interpreting what has been already fulfilled.
-Sir Isaac Newton
What is the Inductive Method?
There are three areas that constitute the inductive method: context, historical background, and language.
In Inductive Method, we are not trying to choose between possibilities, but regard all possibilities that are contained in the text.  Just like a quantum particle that cannot be split and still manages to zip through two slots simultaneously, a line or literary event, especially in ancient Hebrew, may be self-similar to two or more other lines or events.  For understandable practical reasons, translations of the Bible usually give us only one possibility, and so doing, become like large objects that can only go through one slot at the same time, painting a completely different picture than the original, and operating fundamentally otherwise than the original.
Often translations and exegeses of old have opted for a certain possibility, which in times that are more modern has proven to be somewhat unfortunate.  And as these unfortunate possibilities have nested themselves firmly in our collective mind, the correction of these flaws is almost undoable and becomes most painful for those who most love the text.
Hence, popular understanding of Scriptures often has nothing to do with it. 
Biblical Prophecy and the Inductive Method
“Above all, you must understand that no prophecy of Scripture came about by the prophet’s own interpretation of things.  For prophecy never had its origin in the human will, but prophets, though human, spoke from God as they were carried along by the Holy Spirit.” [5]
-2 Peter 1:20-21 (NIV)
The Inductive Method, therefore, aids us in arriving at proper understanding of a prophetic application, which the Holy Spirit can then use to provide correct interpretation.  There are many applications of Scripture, but only one correct interpretation, brought about by the Spirit.  In particular, Biblical prophecy is a ‘tough nut to crack’, without applying the Inductive Method.
What is Bible prophecy?  Tim LaHaye and Thomas Ice define prophecy as history written in advance.  They note:
“The Lord said through Isaiah the prophet, ‘Remember the former things long past, for I am God, and there is no other; I am God, and there is no one like Me, declaring the end from the beginning, and from ancient times things which have not been done, saying, “My purpose will be established, and I will accomplish all My good pleasure,” calling a bird of prey from the east, the man of My purpose from a far country.  Truly I have spoken; truly I will bring it to pass.  I have planned it, surely I will do it’ (Isaiah 46:9-11).  The Lord determines what will happen in history and then He brings it to pass.  Considering that God can do this, it is not difficult for Him to tell us, in advance, what will take place.” [54]
An understanding of the Scripture shows that God has fulfilled amazing prophecies in the past.  This assures us that He will also fulfill those that predict the endtimes.  Furthermore, a detailed study of the prophetic Scriptures is bound to give us a greater understanding of all Bible truth and a deeper appreciation for God’s Word.
What is the purpose of biblical prophecy?  Perhaps John Walvoord  (pictured here [6]) expressed it best: 
[P]rophecy at its very heart is designed to unfold the beauty and loveliness of our Lord and Saviour Jesus Christ.  In the present age, therefore, the Spirit of God is not only to glorify Christ but to show believers things to come as they relate to His person and majesty (cf. John 16:13-15).  Christ is not only the major theme of the Scriptures but also the central theme of prophecy. [55]
That’s it in a nutshell.  Christ—His work and behavior—is the central theme of prophecy.  Yet prophecy is twofold: a past fulfillment and a future promise.  As a past fulfillment, prophecy provides evidence that the Bible is accurate—historically and scientifically!  Take for instance the kings of Daniel 11.  Daniel’s prophecies occurred at least 530 years before the birth of Christ (see box), yet all of his prophecies were dead-on accurate!  Since the past fulfillment of these prophecies were accurate, we can trust that the future will occur the way Daniel predicted, even if we do not yet know the proper interpretation.
 
Verse	Year	King of the South (Egypt)	King of the North (Syria)	Year
5	324-285	Ptolemy I Lagus	Seleucus I Nicator	324-281
6	282-246	Ptolemy II Philadelphus (1)	Antiochus I Soter
Antiochus II Theos (2)	281-262
261-246
7-9	246-222	Ptolemy III Euergetes	Seleucus II Callinicus	242-227
10-12	222-205	Ptolemy IV Philopator	Seleucus III Ceraunus Antiochus III (the Great)	227-223
223-
13-19	205-180	Ptolemy V Epiphanes	Antiochus the Great	-187
20	180-164
145	Ptolemy VI Philometor 
Ptolemy VII Neos Philopator	Seleucus IV Philopator	187-176
21-34	170-164 
163-145
145-116	Ptolemy VIII Euergetes II
Ptolemy VI Philometor(3)
Ptolemy VIII Euergetes II	Antiochus IV Epiphanes (4)
Antiochus V Eupator
Demetrius I Soter
Alexander Balas
Antiochus VI Dionysus
Demetrius II Nicator
Tryphon
Antiochus VII Sidetes
Demetrius II Nicator
Seleucus V
Grypus	176-164
164-162
162-150
150-145
145-144
145-140
143-139
138-129
129-126
126
126-96
	116-107

107-88

88-81
81-80
80
80-58

58-55
55-51

51-30	Cleopatra III & Ptolemy IX Soter II
Cleopatra III & Alexander I
Cleopatra III
Cleopatra Berenice
Ptolemy XI Alexander II
Ptolemy XII Neos Dionysos
Cleopatra V & Berenice IV
Ptolemy XII Neos Dionysos
Cleopatra VII	Antiochus IX Grypus 
Seleucus VI Epiphanes Nicator
Antiochus XI Epiphanes Philadelphus

Philip I
Antiochus X Eusebes
Demetrius III Eucaerus
Antiochus XII Dionysus Epiphanes
Tigranes II the Great
Antiochus XIII Asiaticus
Philip II
(Pompey conquers Antioch)	116-95
96-95

95

95-83
95-83
95-88
86-85

83-69
69-65
65-64
64
35-45	Gap in Time	King of South	Antichrist (Antiochus IV was a type)	Gap in Time

	His daughter was Berenice.  She married Antiochus II Theos.  Ptolemy II is credited with having the Hebrew Scriptures translated into Greek, the Septuagint.
	Verse 6 actually refers to the third king of Syria.  Antiochus I Soter was the second.
	His wife-sister was Cleopatra II (Cleopatra II also married Ptolemy VIII in 145 BC).
	Antiochus IV Epiphanes (a type of antichrist) dealt more harshly with the Jews than anyone before.  He desecrated the Temple and murdered many of them.  He was exiled to Rome after the defeat of Antiochus the Great and returned to claim the thrown upon the death of his brother, Seleucus IV Philopator.  He was held in check by the Romans (who were gaining world power); else, he would have conquered Egypt.  Maccabean revolt occurred in 167 BC (Hasmonean Dynasty), Book of Maccabees.  Antiochus IV died insane three years later.
 
Prophecies of Daniel (c. 537 BCE)
There are four major prophecies in the book of Daniel: Daniel 2; Daniel 7; Daniel 8; and Daniel 11-12. 
Each of these prophecies covers the broad sweep of history from Daniel's day to the end time.  The focal point of each prophecy is the time of the end. 
The principle that Daniel uses is called ‘outline’ prophecy, in which world history is outlined from Daniel's day to the end of time, and each subsequent prophecy elaborates on the time of the end.  In employing this method Daniel made certain that, he rooted the prophecies in history, so that as we see them unfold we can constantly see where we are living in the stream of history. 
You should be aware that other interpretations are suggested for the book of Daniel.  Some have dated the book of Daniel to the 2nd century B.C. and have interpreted the events in the book as occurring mainly in the Grecian Empire.  They do not believe that there is such a thing as prophecy.  To them, not all the prophecies of Daniel were really prophecies, but really history couched in prophetic trappings;  Jewish ‘editors’ are accused of lying for God to make God appear Omnipotent—lying for a God who said ‘thou shalt not lie.’  Yeah, right. 
Others hold that Daniel did write prophecies, but they find their fulfillment in Greece.  For them, the book of Daniel has little meaning for today.  Some have gone to the opposite extreme and suggested that everything in the book of Daniel will yet take place in the future.  Since this view of the prophecies is not rooted in history, no one can be sure when they will take place. 
The Book of Daniel appears in the Septuagint.  The Septuagint derived from the Latin word for ‘seventy’, can be a confusing term, since it ideally refers to the 3d c. BCE translation of the Hebrew Scriptures into Greek in Alexandria, Egypt.  There is a complicated story behind the translation and the various stages, amplifications, and modifications to the collection we now call the Septuagint.
The earliest, and best known, source for the story of the Septuagint is the Letter of Aristeas, a lengthy document that recalls how the Ptolemy (Philadelphus II [285–247 BCE]), desiring to augment his library in Alexandria, Egypt, commissioned a translation of the Hebrew Scriptures into Greek.  The Ptolemy wrote to the chief priest, Eleazar, in Jerusalem, and arranged for six translators from each of the twelve tribes of Israel.  The seventy-two (altered in a few later versions to seventy or seventy-five) translators arrived in Egypt to the Ptolemy's gracious hospitality, and translated the Torah (or Pentateuch: the first five books of the Hebrew Scriptures) in seventy-two days.  Although opinions as to when this occurred differ, liberal scholars find 282 BCE an attractive date.
Be that as it may, there are convincing arguments for a much earlier date, with the book of Daniel being authored during the time of Cyrus King of Persia.  The strongest arguments are based on the internal evidence of the book itself: linguistics, calendars, etc.  Jeramy Townsley gives the date of its writing as, “sometime quite soon after 537 BC” [56] [57].  John W. Walvoord held the view that the record of events in the book extends to the third year of Cyrus (536 B.C.), and therefore spans a period of approximately seventy years [58].  Jesus gives the most compelling argument for early authorship.  Jesus regarded the book as having come from Daniel himself (cf. Matthew 24:15, Daniel 9:27, 12:11).
Context
The context is vital to insure the original intent and purpose of the writer of the day it was written.  Today many teachers and preachers do violence to the Scriptures.  They come up with some of the most erroneous interpretations, because they have ignored this basic principle of context.  The result is that they destroy the original intent and meaning of the text.  They interpret it subjectively.  They interpret it by spiritualizing it.
Text out of its context is nothing but a pretext!  There are various types of sermons such as biographical, textual, topical and propositional.  However, there is only one way to do inductive study that will prepare the expositor for his sermon material, whatever type is chosen.  This is the first area of inductive method!
Historical Background
The historical background is also very important to insure what is being taught or required is relevant to our day.  A good example would be the command to the women to wear veils to honor their husbands at Corinth.  (1 Corinthians. 11:13)  The city had a temple to Aphrodite and the temple prostitutes would be unveiled showing that they had no covering over their lives, in other words no husband and were in fact temple prostitutes. 
The command of Paul to the women is not to use their liberty in Christ lest two things take place: they are mistaken for temple prostitutes, and dishonor their husbands by identifying with the permissive women of the city.  This is what we might call ‘cultural relativity’, the literal command is not obligated nor does it apply to our present day.  But, we can apply the principle of modesty, honoring and obeying husbands as the heads of the homes, and glorifying God in ones conduct, by staying away from all appearance of evil, ‘contextualizing’ the command to our culture.
The Bible transcends the culture regarding morals and ethics, not the reverse.  If the Bible teaches sexual purity, it is an absolute for all ages.  If the Bible teaches lying is wrong, it is for all ages.
We must be careful not to compromise or substitute the Word of God for human teachings in order to justify or rationalize a sinful lifestyle.
1.  by Psychology
2.  by Anthropology
3.  by Sociology
4.  by situational ethics
5.  by value clarification
6. by any other humanistic teaching that contradicts or opposes the word of God, trying to justify or your culpability of a sinful lifestyle.
This is the second area of inductive method!
Language
The original language is key to understanding the meaning as well as the sense of the sentence, be it Hebrew, Aramaic or Greek.
Word studies must be done, not in isolation, but in conjunction with the passage, context and their relation to the other words that structure the sentence or section—lest a wrong meaning is given to a word because the same word can be used in different ways.
This simple three-step process is called ‘general Hermeneutics’ which means “interpretation” or “to explain”, at times called ‘grammatico-historical exegesis’.
There is special Hermeneutics that does not replace the former, but adds other rules to help come to the original meaning.  This would be true of Poetry and Prophecy.
Whenever a person begins to approach a book, a chapter or a section, the central theme or subject must be grasped, and this comes only by reading it over-and-over again until the central theme stands out as the ‘sun’, illuminating the rest of the material.
The Gospel of John central theme is: ‘Jesus is the Christ, the Son of God, and believing you may have life in His name’.—John.  20:31
The theme of Romans is: ‘the righteousness of God revealed for the salvation of man by grace and faith’.—Romans. 1:16-17
This is the third area of inductive method!
Three necessary steps for Inductive Method
There are three necessary steps for performing the inductive method: observation, interpretation, and application.
Observation
The first step is called ‘Observation’, which reveals what the text says.  The first step of observation is to record the obvious observation, what is being told in the sentences.
	Do not think any information is unimportant or too obvious.
	Only what is found in the text is biblical truth, distinct from human speculation or interjection of one’s views or understanding.
	The observations should not be limited or confined to one reading!
The second step is to record the various themes found in the passage.
	The deity of Christ
	Faith
	Sanctification
	Prayer, etc.
The third step is to record the natural divisions (i.e., chapter, paragraphs, and verses) in the section, chapter or book.
	Do not accept the divisions of your Bible as correct; as if they are inspired by the Holy Spirit, they are not.
	After spending time with your text, you may come to the same division or divisions but you are now convinced by your own study.
This necessary process will provide you with all the information about the book or passage that can be known about the text, which is why it is called ‘inductive’.
Interpretation
The second step is called ‘interpretation’, which focuses on the general Hermeneutics, context, history and language, discovering what it means.  The goal of the step of concentration or interpretation is that the basic observations begin to be identified in relationship to each other and the entire text, in order to reveal what it meant to the original recipients.  The German term is ‘Sitz im Leben’, which means ‘life situation’, what it means to the people to whom it was written.
You should outline the book, chapter or section in order to reveal the progressive movement and relationship of the sections and between the major and minor points.  You can do this on a worksheet or in the margins of your Bible.
	A simple outline
	A more detailed outline
	A full and complete outline
Next, list the key words and pivotal terms that appear to be emphatic or the major focus of the verse or passage.
	Words that are repeated more than once
	Words that stand out, or give importance in the text
List key phrases that stand out or are repeated.
	They can be mentioned one or more times.
	They determine and are key for the correct interpretation, the phrase “Your people” indicates Israel in Daniel 9:24
List key verse or verses.
	Each book has such verses.
	Each chapter has such verses.
Identify theological themes and mark their relationship to each other and the passage.
	In relation to the section
	In relation to each passage
	In relation to the whole of the book
Ask questions of your text:
	What?
	When?
	Where?
	Who?
	Why?
	How?
Use parallel passages…
	To support
	To supplement
	To complement
	To clear up
	To interpret
But never develop your parallel passage as a substitute for your original passage, stick to your text!  Another thing to understand is that the scriptures interpret the scriptures with the illuminating work of the Holy Spirit (1 Corinthians. 2:13).  In the context, Paul is contrasting the natural mind of man that is blind to the things of God and the spiritual mind of the believer, who is able to receive the things of the Spirit.
Use concordances, Lexicons, dictionaries, encyclopedias, word studies and commentaries, or computer help, etc.
	These helps should not be used at this point.
	When the time comes to use these resources, you, the expositor, should have a good knowledge of the passage, chapter and book to evaluate and decide the value of the commentary, not simply accept what is said.
Identify the genre, the type (genre) of literature.
	Is it narrative?
	Is it poetry?
	Is it history?
	Is it law?
	Is it prophecy?
The process of ‘observation’ and ‘concentration’ has allowed you to know what the passage says and what it means!  This is the task of every expositor, to discover the intended meaning for the people of that day, and only then make application for today!
Application
The third step is called ‘Application’, which centers on the practical and relevant truth to be lived out as a Christian in today’s world in relation to the meaning of the text—how it applies to me in daily living!
You, the expositor, make application of the theology being taught in the passage to instruct the believer in the faith:
	Regeneration
	Sanctification
	Illumination
	Glorification
Once again, you make application to your, ‘the believer’s, personal life and obedience—how the text applies to his or hers everyday life:
	The practice of having a prayer life
	The practice of reading the word
	The need of being involved in the body, the church
	The exercise of the gifts of the Spirit in a decent manner and order
Next, you declare the application to the responsibility that the community of faith—with you as a part—has towards the lost society:
	The church’s responsibility to be light
	The church is to be the salt.
	The church to be a fisher of men and women
Please realize that not all these points or elements are applicable to every verse, but the expositor has to allow God to direct him or her as to the specific theme and purpose behind the text, giving only that which will be in line with the theme, to communicate the meaning and application!
Example of using the Inductive Method – Genesis 2:7
“Then the Lord God formed man of dust from the ground, and breathed into his nostrils the breath of life; and man became a living being.” [1]
Step I
In Genesis, God likens the descendants of Abraham to three different entities: stars in the sky (Exodus 32:13), sand on the shore (Genesis 32:12), and the dust of the earth (Genesis 28:14)—and all three carry a wealth of profundity.  The phrase ‘dust of the earth’ for instance, is not the grey stuff you find underneath the refrigerator, but is the raw material from which everything was made (Genesis 1 and 2).
Step II
At many locations in the New Testament it is made clear that the ‘sons of Abraham’ are not his physical descendants but rather ‘those who are of faith’ (Gal 3:7) and that the many descendants of Abraham are in fact not many, but one: Christ (Gal 3:16).
Step III
Then, when we take in account what the Bible obviously states to be a connection between Adam and Christ: “The first man, Adam, became a living soul.  The last Adam, a life-giving Spirit” [5] (1 Cor. 15:45).  We find a beautiful self-similar pattern connecting Genesis 2:7 with Acts 2:
Genesis 2:7	Acts 2
God has created dust of the earth.
God has inspired humans into the knowledge of Him and everything else; sons of Abraham; dust of the earth.

Forms a vital composition from the dust	Forms a vital composition from those who know
Releases into the composition His breath	Releases into the composition His Spirit

The composition becomes a living entity; apart from inanimate objects.	The composition becomes a super-living entity; apart from other life and cultural organizations.
Inductive and Scientific Methods
Often patterns from the Bible are so deeply profound and important, and openly relevant to the betterment of humankind, that secular thinking comes up with it too.  Sometimes the secular conclusion is openly identical to the Biblical one.  An example of this is the sixth and eighth Commandments, ‘you shall not kill’ and ‘you shall not steal.’  Most governments have adopted these laws in their constitutions because a people that does not steal or kill is healthier and more prosperous than a people that kills and steals.
Sometimes a secular conclusion is stated in such a way that it is not immediately obvious that Scriptures has come up with it as well.  Take the almighty Scientific Method for instance.  During the 17th century, societies began to lean more and more upon scientific knowledge and it became increasingly important to sift out nonsense from sound beliefs.  Hence a scientific convention was reached: You can only work with what you observe.  And what you observe must be observable by someone else, somewhere else.  Your observations must be gathered into a theory that explains why the things you observe are there.  If someone else devises a theory that explains the same observations, your theory and her theory must be identical.  Finally, your theory must be able to predict what you are going to observe next.
This convention—this Scientific Method—still rules science today and it cancelled out a lot of superstition.  Sadly, it also caused a breach between science and religion, because for a long period, much about God could not be confirmed by means of the Scientific Method.
Today however, we have reached the conclusion that science leans on faith just as heavily as religion does.  It is the only way to be sure about anything.  And advances in Scripture Theory allow us to prove more and more the authority of the Bible in matters usually addressed by science.
In 1992, George Smoot and consorts established the famous COBE  picture, which told us a lot about how space-time happened.  In his book, Wrinkles in Time , Smoot writes, 
"At present it is hard to imagine scientific societies having theologians and others to advise them on the spiritual world.  Scientific societies do maintain lawyers and occasionally ethics committees to advise them.  As science matures and finds it domain we are likely to see more interactions of this type." [59] 
Faith—the key to all certainty—is often talked about in the Bible.  And the more we learn about science and Scripture, the more faith and scientific knowledge converge.
Paul writes, “See to it that no one takes you captive through philosophy and empty deception...” (Col 2:8), which is exactly what the Scientific Method was intended to do.  Faith is not ‘the bold trust in things that make no sense’.  It is not the religious platform after the understanding of the times.  It has nothing to do with obedience to certain dogmas.  Nothing to do with lack of proof.  In fact, faith and scientific knowledge are really quite alike: Both Paul’s definition of faith and the Scientific Method consist of two parts.  Have a look:
Paul in Hebrews11:1	Scientific Method

Faith gives certainty of the unseen things that exist beyond seeable things.	A theory must explain all observations and connect them into a system.
Faith gives certainty of what lies ahead.	A theory must accurately predict the outcome of future experiments.

The big difference between faith and a scientific theory is that faith is trust that yields understanding of the observable world, while a scientific theory tries to describe the observable world, remains incomplete, and requires additional trust to become convicting.  The scientific method is the Jessica Rabbit deduction of Paul's definition of faith.
In this chapter, we have touched some of the fundamental principles that make the Bible tick.  In the next chapter, we are going to look at a principle that lies at the heart of all the others: an entity is a behavior, not that which executes the behavior.  But, before we go there, let’s look at some common biblical misunderstandings.
What Is Science? [60]
The term ‘science’ once brought observation and objective investigation to mind.  When one scientist did an experiment, others could repeat his experiment, and obtain the same results.  If no one who repeated the experiment could come up with the same results, those results had been ‘falsified’, that is, shown not to be true.  An idea, which could not be put to the test so that it could be shown to be false if it was, might be a good idea, but it was not science. 
Because the theory of evolution seems able to accommodate whatever data, no matter how conflicting, some are insisting that the requirement that “for an idea to be scientific, it must be testable and falsifiable should be dropped”.  In addition, to protect the Theory of Evolution, many have begun to insist that science must explain, by solely natural causes, all that we observe.  That is, they want to exclude from the realm of science anything in which God is involved. 
In Kansas, the state guidelines approached this, defining science as, 
"The human activity of seeking natural explanations for what we observe in the world around us." [61] , p. 87
This could mean that when studying the origin of the universe and of life the conclusion was already determined before the research had even begun.  By this definition, it would not be scientific to consider any of the evidence that God created.  A real scientist, however, should not turn his back on evidence he does not like. 
When it is necessary to change the definition of science to assure a godless beginning for the universe and for life, it is time to take a critical look at that idea.  Instead, good scientists and teachers are now being fired for simply pointing out some of the problems with an atheistic evolutionary approach. [62]  
Such pressure to conform does not encourage honest science.  Announcements of discoveries that obviously show intelligent design, as opposed to mindless evolution, are often accompanied by wording such as, "Isn't it amazing what evolution has done."  Without that kind of a comment attached, it can be difficult to get a paper published that describes an aspect of nature that shows design! 
While many people believe in both God and evolution, the atheistic interpretation is the one generally presented by schools and the media.  It is usually called ‘naturalism’.  In this way, it is not obvious that atheism is being established as the state religion.  The word naturalism has several meanings, but the one that applies in this context is: 
“the belief that the natural world, known and experienced scientifically, is all that exists and that there is no supernatural or spiritual creation, control, or significance.” [63]  
Many schools avoid any suggestion that the Creator might exist.  They keep textbooks and school libraries purged, not only of evidence that is presented in a way that might indicate a Creator, but also of information that reveals the scientific weaknesses of the theory of evolution.  I find it hard to distinguish this situation from censorship. 
The evidence itself is the same for both creationists and evolutionists, but too often only atheistic interpretations are allowed.  One of my aims is to bring about a better balance by revealing that which has been hidden: the ways in which the evidence supports creation by God and disproves the theory of evolution.   
Summary 14: The Inductive Method for Beginners
The Inductive method consists of context, historical background, and language.
The steps of the inductive method are observation, interpretation, and application.
Scriptures contains scenes that are self-similar to other scenes in Scriptures. 
The meanings of words are fuzzy like quantum particles.  Meanings of scenes are carried by the full stretch of meaning of the words.  


 
CHAPter 16.1. Misunderstanding the Bible
- Did I get it right, huh, did I? -
The Bible says that the earth is flat
The Tree Of Knowledge was a bad, bad tree
Sarah snickered because she did not believe she would be a mom.
The Bible is the word of God
Jonah was gobbled up by a whale.
A true story is something that actually happened.
The Bible is infallible
If you are good, you'll go to heaven
During a duel with Satan, God wrecked Job just to prove a point
Astrology is always wrong.
Jesus asked God to forgive His executioners for crucifying Him.
Thomas was a heinous unbeliever, made a fool of by Christ.
- Does the Bible say that the earth is flat?-
Quite to the contrary.
The Biblical worldview certainly differs from ours, but that is probably because the Bible's view on pretty much anything differs from ours.  That's why the Bible exists.  But nowhere is the earth called ‘flat’.
Isaiah writes about the “circle of the earth" (40:22), which may indicate merely the circular horizon but certainly does not reject a spherical earth model.  Actually, Isaiah lived in a hill country and his horizon was not a circle.  Isaiah's literary abilities were extraordinary and if he was speaking of the horizon, he would have chosen a different word than circle.  , this remains conjecture.
In Job 26:7, however we read the astounding and accurate remark that “He stretches out the north over empty space and hangs the earth on nothing.” [1] (NASB); something that is contradicted by every ancient world model, but confirmed by modern science.
- Was the Tree of Knowledge of Good and Evil bad from the start?-
Bananas!

That tree, including its fruits, was as perfect as the rest of Paradise, even ‘a delight to the eyes and desiring to make wise’.  But Adam and Eve misapplied the fruits by eating them.  
“When the woman saw that the tree was good for food, and that it was a delight to the eyes, and that the tree was desirable to make one wise, she took from its fruit and ate; and she gave also to her husband with her, and he ate.” [1] 
– Genesis 3:6 (NASB)
Try eating a Wendy’s billboard and you'll get it.  Also, see Proverbs 3:5.
There is no mentioning of an apple in this account.  The fruit of the tree of knowledge of good and evil may just as well have been a banana.
- Sarah laughed from unbelief? -
The Bible disagrees
Sure, Sarah laughed within herself and she denied she did, perhaps because she was trying to be polite, or perhaps because she was afraid that she might be scolded. 
However, Abraham laughed as well and for the same reason, namely out of gladness for becoming a father (Genesis 17:17). 
Being childless was a great grief, especially in those days and especially for women.  But, Abraham and Sarah had received a big promise some time before: they were going to be parents for sure, even the arch-parents of a great nation. 
To mark that promise, Abraham had circumcised himself, his son Ishmael and the entire village that he ruled.  And to put that in perspective: previously, Abraham waged a war with 318 men that were born in his house (Genesis 14:14).  Add to them their elderly fathers, and an untold number of foreign-born men and you have an idea of what a large-scale operation this would have been.  Abraham must have been an incredibly persuasive man to get this all done.  No man will surrender a piece of his penis without having been presented with an exceptionally good reason, and no woman will have her husband incapacitated for quite some time (Genesis 34:25) for just an airily inkling.
Sarah, being Mrs. Mayor, was most likely busy for months afterwards appeasing the women folk, explaining what was going on and the whole enterprise was certainly impossible to not pay heed to or even forget. 
On top of that, Sarai was re-named Sarah, so that every time someone called her, she was reminded of the fact that God promised her a child.  And when she overhears a visiting stranger assure her husband that she will be a mother same time next year, her heart leaps for joy and she laughs, just like Abraham. 
The stranger’s response is full of encouragement and kindness: “Go ahead.  Be glad.  Be openly happy.” 
Centuries later, the writer of Hebrews says, “By faith even Sarah herself received ability to conceive, even beyond the proper time of life, since she considered Him faithful who had promised.” [1] (Hebrews 11:11, NASB) 
Sarah's faith existed before she conceived of Isaac, not after, and she laughed because of that faith.
- Is the Bible the Word of God? -
Yes!  No!  Yes!
The question whether the Bible is the Word of God sits on a very slippery slope and if I say “no” now, we will probably be booted off every Christian bookshelf.
We regularly use the phrase ‘Word of God’ for the Bible, and there is nothing wrong with that.  After all, God speaks to people through the Bible most clearly; the Bible is a word, and the Bible certainly comes from God, so the answer is yes.
 
Yet God also speaks through other texts (see list on the right), or buildings (the tabernacle) or nature (Romans 1:20) or people that otherwise talk nothing but nonsense (Balaam, Numbers 22 to 24), or movies (Fireproof).  The Bible is the word of God—the word from God and the word about God, as opposed to the word of or about someone else.
In the Bible itself, the phrase Word of God (in Hebrew: Dabar YHWH) is reserved solely for a Person of the triune-Godhead, namely the One who became flesh in Jesus Christ (John 1).  That Person first shows up in Genesis 15:1, where He comes to Abraham to tell him about His plan for the world, and to indicate that He will be a human someday.
The Bible, on the other hand, is a compilation of books, not a Person.  Jesus saves people, but the Bible does not.  You can learn the whole Bible by heart and still not be saved.  You can pray to the Bible and thus blatantly violate the First Commandment.  You can love the Bible, but the Bible will not love you back.
It is a bit like the difference between New York City and New York State.  If you are standing on Times Square and a daft tourist asks you if we are in New York or not, you can wholeheartedly affirm.  If you happen to be in Albany, however, you might tell the tourist, "Yes!  No!  Yes!"		The book of Nathan the Prophet; a non-surviving work mentioned in canon with the Book of Samuel (1 Chr. 29:29).  The Book of Nathan is also said to contain acts of Solomon (2 Chr. 9:29). 
	The Book of Gad the Seer; a non-surviving work mentioned in canon with the Book of Samuel (1 Chr. 29:29)
	The Corinthian Letter, prior to First Corinthians, was a letter written by Paul to the church in Corinth, to which he refers in 1 Cor. 5:9.  This Very First Letter to the Corinthians is lost. 
	The Complete Works of Solomon contained 3,000 proverbs and 1,005 songs.  Only a fraction of these works made it into the canon (1 Ki 4:32). 
	The Book of the Wars of YHWH, a work of which no trace remains except for the quote in Numbers 21:14-15. 
	The Book of Jashar is said to report the miraculous behavior of the sun and moon during Joshua's battle with the Amorites.  The book is referenced as an argument that it really happened.  The same book is noted to contain David's Song of the Bow (1 Samuel 1:18). 
	The Book of Acts of Solomon is listed as a reference, and maybe even a source, in 1 Ki 11:41.
	The Books of Enoch are works of legend and fabrication created over the ages and based on the single, enigmatic note in Genesis 5:24 that Enoch walked with God and was taken by God.  Paul seems to tap into more than the Torah reveals (Heb. 11:5) and Jude actually quotes 1 Enoch 1:9 in his verse 14.
- Was Jonah in a whale? -
Nope, no whale.
Jonah was gobbled up by a great fish, and a whale is not a fish.  Does not even look like one.
The Hebrew word for fish literally means ‘one of those things that greatly multiply’.  Whales do not greatly multiply.
As Jonah reposes beneath a plant, a very tiny creature called 'one-of-those-little-purple-thingies' from which in those day purple dye was made, came and smote the plant.
- Is Truth the same as Reality? -
Not true.
Truth is a Person: Jesus Christ.  A true story is a story that reflects the nature of Christ.
“Jesus answered, ‘I am the way and the truth and the life.  No one comes to the Father except through me.’” [5] 
- John 14:6 (NIV, italics added)
Truth comfortably stretches from reality into fiction (parables like the Good Samaritan are true, but not historically verifiable), and does not contain all reality.
An event that really happened may not be ‘true’, and an event that was made up may be true—and that’s weird too!
- Is the Bible infallible? -
Yikes!  Tough question!
Answering this question would require a complete understanding of truth, or else you cannot compare something else with it to see if there is a match.  And since humankind has not reached a consensus on the definition of truth, any statement that contains references to truth is vague at best and limited for sure.
The answer depends entirely on the standard you use or the stage upon which you unfold your arguments.  Take the number pi (π) for instance.  Ask any mathematician if pi is always 3.1415...  And most will say yes!  But a mathematician with a slightly broader scope will calmly inform you that the value of pi will continuously change if you travel along a circle on a hyperbolic surface.  The value or even the constancy of pi cannot be addressed if the geometry is not declared.  Same with the Bible.
If you want to think about things, you need to first state your ‘operating system.’  Are we using math (so that 1+1 is always 2) or poetry (so that 1+1 may be everything or nothing)?  Are we using tried laws of logic (upon which everyone will agree) or are we using our own beliefs (I am right, no matter what others say)?
And if you want to ponder the infallibility of the Bible, which one will you use?  There are many different translations, all marvelously inept to convey the vast intricacies of the Hebrew and Greek texts.  Back to the source texts, you say.  We do not have them!  The Bible is a compilation of works that in turn are compilation of even older sources.  We do not have the original works of Moses, or the original descriptions of the Temple, or any of the other stories.  The oldest extant copy of the Hebrew Bible is about 1000 years old, and the oldest fragments are of 200 BC.
But the real question is: Should we expect the infallibility of God’s word to be vested in verbal details, as if it were a computer code that freezes if only one bit falls over, stern like a graven image?  Or is the Bible much more like nature, where variety makes all the difference and apparent contradictions result only in greater complexity?
I have been devoted to Bible study on many levels, and have been doing it for decades.  Yet I do not have the answers.  But I generally oppose the idea that the bridge between God and humanity rests on intellectual rigidity.  Any high-ranking academic may study the oldest Hebrew texts for a lifetime and remain unmoved, and any kid can pick up an old dog-eared NIV and read with an open heart and become forever changed by God’s Spirit.
Just like the perfection of the bride lies not in the bride but in the love of the bridegroom (Ezekiel 16:14; Song of Solomon 4:7), so lies the infallibility of the Bible, not in the Bible, but in the infusion with the Holy Spirit.
Bottom line: God does not work with golden calves, no matter how shiny.  The question on the infallibility of the Bible itself is flawed.
- Will being good get you to heaven? -
Sorry, no deal.
This is where the Bible differs in opinion with pretty much every major current in every major religion: Good behavior is not salvific; you cannot earn or even wing your way into heaven.  No way.
Salvation is a gift from God, and good behavior is a consequence of salvation, not a cause of it.
Salvation is a deep and difficult concept, but it comes down to you having some kind of application in the everlasting Body of Christ.  That Body of Christ is even more deep and complicated, but that one comes down to a firmly interlinked group of people, like the cells of a body that together make the whole thing work.  Being saved and being part of that Body is the same thing.  If you are not part of that Body, it means that you have no real function in the grand scheme of the universe.  And that means that you will be edited out, like a very nice but irrelevant chapter of a great novel.
People that are keen on ‘good behavior,’ are usually very self-absorbed, checking themselves constantly on whether they are still up to their own standards.  And if they heed someone else, it is usually to criticize them for not being like them.  A partaker of the Body of Christ is remarkably unmindful of him or herself, and tries to figure out what someone next to them might need to function (as a consequence, not as a habit).
The key word to salvation is not behavior but application.  Get ‘applied’ into something that will not quit, and you will not quit.
And besides, how does one define ‘good behavior’?  One would need a big law-book on universal justice to figure that one out.  The Bible compares the Body of Christ to a real, single human body.  And a real human body produces stomach acid and prowling white blood cells and sweat and tears.  The mental equivalents of these traits are probably not looked favorably upon by your average bystander, who likes to see ‘good’ behavior.  Meaning: it is probably not recommendable to be either average or standing by people.
When Jesus said, “I am the light,” He was not speaking in vague riddles.  Just as it is impossible to cross the light-speed barrier, so it is impossible to go to heaven on your own.  The invitation that is extended to every one of us, is to get on board with Jesus, and He will take you to warp 10.
People have been trying to figure out for ages what it is that you have to do to get on board with Jesus, but that is the same question as before.  There is nothing you can do.  Except for wanting it really, really bad.  If you want it—really, really bad—that is when you will find yourself right there.
Surrender to the knowledge that you do not know what is going on, but that there is a God who does, who is personal and intimate, and who will lead you on if you let Him.  Always be aware that you are not your own, but that you belong to a greater good for everybody.  Let your own “going to heaven” no longer be your objective (1 Corinthians 10:24),
- Did God duel Satan and wreck Job while at it? -
Messjöche! 

Job was a good guy and revered God.  But he also feared that his sons sinned and cursed God.  To atone for his sons he engaged a mechanism: a burned offering for every son.
Fortunately, for all of us, salvation comes through Jesus Christ and not from some kind of ritual.  Unfortunately, for Job, the crucifixion had not happened yet.  All Job had to work with was the Law, which demands offerings, and so he offered.  But ‘by the works of the Law no flesh will be justified in His sight; for through the Law comes the knowledge of sin’—Romans 3:20. 
And that automatically surrendered him to Satan and his nasty doings.  
The good news of course is that “God causes all things to work together for good to those who love God...”—Romans 8:28.  And Job certainly loved God.  Job did not sin (1:22) but he also was not ‘safe’ (as safety comes in Christ).  It takes Job close to 40 chapters to understand that in addition to loving God, he should realize that he does not have a clue of what is going on and what God is doing. 
God patiently instructs humankind on life and how it works.  But good behavior is not salvific. 
The story of Job, however, flows seamlessly over into the discussion about the nature and consequences of sin.  Sin is whatever makes a person deviate from perfection.  How God manages the universe is hard to guess at, and why some of us lose our children to violent people or natural forces is incomprehensible.  Why do some of us get cancer, plunge into insanity or bankruptcy or any kind of destructive temptation?  Has it all to do with God choosing the least of evils?  The consequences of sin are inescapable, and sadly, the consequences of our neighbor’s sin may easily affect us. 
Some of us die, and we do not know why—actually, that is a ‘fate’ we all will meet, unless Christ returns in our lifetime.  But we have the promise that “God causes all things to work together for good to those who love God, to those who are called according to His purpose.” [1] (NASB, Romans 8:28).
- Is Astrology Always Wrong? -
Nope, just often misapplied.
Stars were created to be signs (Genesis 1:14), but as with every message (including Scripture) a flawed exegesis gives flawed conclusions.

It appears that a baby's earliest impressions have a strong influence on its character development.  A child that is born under a winter-sky will initially experience lots of darkness, mothers with fluffy sweaters and the smell of hot chocolate.  A child born under a summer-sky will experience lots of light, lots of naked limbs and the smell of vegetation.
Certainly, there is a connection between character-tendency and star sign.  Still, every message—including the Tree of Knowledge of Good and Evil, science and astrology—should lead to Christ.  If you stumble upon the path of biblical, heathen astrologers (the Matthew-magi) it comes highly recommended that you take it.
- They Know Not What They Do? -
Ignorance!

Apparently, many people assume that Jesus asked forgiveness for his executioners because those poor suckers thought they were torturing an ‘ordinary guy’ to death, which is then believed to be less horrid than killing the Son of God.
But in the Old Testament (which, covenantally spoken, ends at the resurrection and not the birth of Christ) we find the Mosaic law of an eye for an eye (and a death for a death).
Jesus was not asking forgiveness for their act, because that act was ordained pretty much at the creation.  Instead, He was asking forgiveness for their ignorance ("...for they know not what they are doing").  Not knowing that Jesus was the Christ —who had to be brought to death—was their transgression.
- Was Thomas an unbeliever, made a fool of by Christ? -
No, not by Christ.
Thomas was not present when Christ appeared the first time.  And since Thomas was under orders to not believe any exited report about Christ being here or there (Matthew 24:23 & 26) Thomas bravely stood his ground.  Right on, Thomas! 
When Christ finally shows Himself to Thomas, He congratulates him for ‘having seen Him, not for believing Him’.  Thomas believed Christ the whole time!  He was just a bit skeptical about his comrades and their zeal.  This is always wise.
 
To Be is To Do
- Existential Definition According To Behavior -
Human beings must have action; and they will make it if they cannot find it.
-Albert Einstein 
Though I had success in my research both when I was mad and when I was not, eventually I felt that my work would be better respected if I thought and acted like a 'normal' person.
-John Forbes Nash, Jr.
A dynamic language
The Hebrew language works different from ours.  That makes it very difficult to translate, and that causes translations to be often poor and lacking.  One of the differences is that the Hebrew language is much more dynamic than ours is.  Hebrew is all about action.  Something is reckoned after what it does, not after how it looks.  This principle is quite fundamental in Scripture; it is applied all over.  Probably most drastic is the Second Commandment where the Lord prohibits the making of graven images.  A graven image after all does not move, and a statue that, for instance, tries to display a calf is not showing typical calf-behavior but static appearance.
The principle even occurs in the New Testament, which is written in Greek but with a Hebrew way of thinking.  The second chapter of James, for instance, explains that a believer is not someone who looks like one, or even says she is one, but rather someone who acts like one.  To be is to do.
Principle (17)
In Hebrew Scriptures, and all models derived thereof, entities are reckoned solely after their behavior and not after their appearance.
An entity is a behavior, not that which executes the behavior.
It is crucial that the reader takes a firm hold of this principle.  If a modern Westerner would see a picture of a lion, she would say, “That is a lion.”  If an ancient Hebrew would see someone gather and devour food, she would say, “That is a lion.” 
 
Imagine you are on a farm.  In a field ahead, you notice a cow, a horse, and overhead flies a swallow.  Question: of the horse, the cow and the swallow, which two are most alike?
In our modern, Western way of thinking, we are prone to define something after the way it looks.  Both horse and cow are large mammals and are more alike than a cow and a swallow or a horse and a swallow.  Our answer: the cow and the horse are most alike.
But a Hebrew minds looks at activity, not appearance.  And it is when these animals begin to move around that their characteristics show.  Cows graze or lie down and chew the cud.  Horses however can be seen racing along the hills, in tight packs or alone.  Horses are swift, may turn abruptly, shear the meadows like... swallows in flight.
The Hebrew verb sus means to be swift or to flash by, and the noun derived from this verb indicates both the horse and the swallow.   A swallow would probably be known as something like ‘one who is swift and flies with wings’.  A horse would probably be deemed ‘one who is swift and strong and vigorous.’
For the next paragraph, it is important that we understand that in Biblical times a horse was not seen as a giddy cousin of the cow, but rather as a big, strong version of a swallow.
Lemmings, bosons and horses
Lemmings , bosons and probably after the last paragraph, horses too, are pretty weird.  But as weird as it may seem, they do have something in common.  Bosons  are the smallest quantity in which a force can exist; the ‘atoms’ of forces.  The smallest ‘push’ givable is a ‘push’ carried by one photon.  ‘Half a photon’ does not exist, just as dry water does not exist, or a square circle.
In his book In Search of the Ultimate Building Blocks , [64] and attempting to  connect a recognizable image to the way bosons work, mastermind Gerard ‘t Hooft (pictured here [6])—a Dutch physicist and Nobel Prize laureate—compared bosons to lemmings.  Just as a band of lemmings will throw themselves off a cliff, bosons pour out to a lower energy level.  And that is how things work, literally.  If it were not for those bosons that behave like lemmings, things would not work in the universe.
Still, a single boson may be as meek and fuzzy as a lemming, but an army of bosons keeps planets in orbit!  Somehow, the image of a lemming does not quite answer to the idea of a force particle.  To understand the creature we need an image (an action) of something more forceful—a horse, for instance, or rather a mounted soldier.
Soldiers to a country are what bosons are to an object.  When two countries collide, they send their armies to meet, in very much the same way as two colliding objects will exchange bosons upon collision.  One soldier is the quantum of a nation's power, just as a boson is a quantum of force.  And now that we know how the men of old looked at horses, we may expect that if indeed these men of old somehow realized the existence of bosons, they would liken them not to lemmings, but to horsemen.
Probably the most famous horses in Scripture are the four horses of the Book of Revelation.
 
The Four HorseMEN of Revelation 6.
- The striking resemblance of the four horses of Revelation 6 and the four natural forces -
1And I saw when the Lamb opened one of the seals, and I heard, as it were the noise of thunder, one of the four beasts saying, Come and see.  2And I saw, and behold a white horse: and he that sat on him had a bow; and a crown was given unto him: and he went forth conquering, and to conquer.  3And when he had opened the second seal, I heard the second beast say, Come and see.  4And there went out another horse that was red: and power was given to him that sat thereon to take peace from the earth, and that they should kill one another: and there was given unto him a great sword.  5And when he had opened the third seal, I heard the third beast say, Come and see.  And I beheld, and lo a black horse; and he that sat on him had a pair of balances in his hand.  6And I heard a voice in the midst of the four beasts say, A measure of wheat for a penny, and three measures of barley for a penny; and see thou hurt not the oil and the wine.  7And when he had opened the fourth seal, I heard the voice of the fourth beast say, Come and see.  8And I looked, and behold a pale horse: and his name that sat on him was Death, and Hell followed with him.  And power was given unto them over the fourth part of the earth, to kill with sword, and with hunger, and with death, and with the beasts of the earth. [8] 
Revelation 6:1-8 (KJV)

I do not think that John knew what all this meant, but merely recorded what he had seen and heard.  I join John in his dilemma, for I still do not know the correct interpretation of the four horsemen.  Many people have tried to provide answers, and some are quite interesting while others are far-fetched.
I believe there is a past fulfillment—as well as a future prediction—of the four horsemen of revelation.  I believe this is necessary to provide credibility to what John recorded about his vision. 
The four horses of Revelation 6 show up one at the time.  They all have a hue, one or more attributes, an activity and are related to one of four ‘living creatures’ (listed in Revelation 4:7) that are positioned in close proximity to the throne of God.  When we look closely at these four horses, we see a striking resemblance with the four natural forces, up to the order in which they appear (and in the previous chapter, we have already established why a boson would be portrayed as a horse).
Creature (Rev. 4:7)	Horseman (Rev 6:1-8)	Attribute (Rev. 6:1-8)
 
 	 
Gravity curves space-time.  The bow is a long distance weapon and Gravity is a long distance force.  Gravity rules the universe and the white horseman wears a crown.

 
 	 
A great sword for a strong force (and, hence, a small one for the weak force, see below).  The sword is a proximity weapon and the Strong Force works only within the nucleus.

 
 	 

Electromagnetism works with balancing charges.  The voice orders three measures of cow-food per one measure of man-food.  The nucleus consists of one proton (=three quarks that listen to the Strong Force) per one electron.

 
 	 
A small sword for a weak force (compared to the big sword for the Strong Force).  The sword is a proximity weapon and the Weak Force works only within the nucleus.  This horseman trails death.  The Weak Force is responsible for all nuclear decay in the universe.


Have a look at each of the horses: 

 
Chapter 18.1 The White Horseman of Revelation 6
Then I saw when the Lamb broke one of the seven seals, and I heard one of the four living creatures saying as with a voice of thunder, "Come."  I looked, and behold, a white horse, and he who sat on it had a bow; and a crown was given to him, and he went out conquering and to conquer. [1]
-Revelation 6:1-2 (NASB)
- The First of the Four Horsemen -
 	The four horsemen of Revelation 6 appear to be congruent with the four natural forces.  The white horseman is highly similar to Gravity.
 
 	The White Horseman of Revelation 6
Gravity
 

Sequential: First
The white horseman is the first of the four horsemen to show up.
Gravity is the first force to ‘break free’ from the Grand Unification
The living creature: Lion 
The Hebrew word for lion, ary, comes from the verb arah that means to “gather up” or “gather together”.  A lion was seen as 'one that gathers' (Judges 14). 
Gravity always attracts; never repels.  This is in contrast to electromagnetism, the other long distance force, which is represented by a horseman carrying scales.
The color: White 
The word for white in Hebrew is bad and this word is used to indicate a certain garment that was both white and seamless.  And even though whiteness of skin is not very positive in Scripture (usually indicates either leprosy or arrogance) whiteness and seamlessness of garment is.
The white horseman returns in Revelation 19 where it carries the one called Faithful and True, Word of God, King of Kings, Lord of Lords.  Many have comfortably connected the white horseman of Revelation 19 to the one of Revelation 6, and to Jesus Christ, for obvious reasons.  When Jesus was crucified, soldiers cast lots for His garment because they did not want to tear it up, as it was seamless.
Gravitons are too small to be observed individually.  Gravity has the appearance of a continuum.
Attribute 1: Crown
Gravity rules the physical universe.  Its range is indefinite and gravitational pulses move at the speed of light, and in the very fabric of space-time.  Gravity is the force that governs, like an emperor, the universe’s large-scale goings on. 
Attribute 2: Bow 
The bow is a long distance weapon based on the tension that comes from bending a stick.  The sword, with which the green and red horsemen are equipped, is a proximity weapon, as these horsemen represent the two local, nuclear forces. 
Gravity is a long distance force.  It is able to do what it does through space-time curvature.
Activity: Conquering
Gravity is the only force that can overcome all other forces and structures.  When a large star collapses and a black hole forms, gravity takes over completely and all traces of particles and other forces are erased. 
Chapter 18.2 The Red Horseman of Revelation 6
When He broke the second seal, I heard the second living creature saying, "Come."  And another, a red horse, went out; and to him who sat on it, it was granted to take peace from the earth, and that men would slay one another; and a great sword was given to him. [1]
-Revelation 6:3-4 (NASB)
- The Second of the Four Horsemen -
 	The four horsemen of Revelation 6 appear to be congruent with the four natural forces.  The red horseman is highly similar to the Strong Nuclear Force.

 	The Red Horseman of the Apocalypse
The Strong Nuclear Force
 

Sequential: Second
The red horseman is the second of the four horsemen to show up.
The strong nuclear force is the second force to break free from the symmetry of the forces
The living creature: Calf 
Bovines were domesticated and used for their strength.  Where a horse brings to mind travels long and far, a cow (or ox) is associated to activities around the house. 
The strong nuclear force is a local force, confined to the nucleus of the atom.
The color: Red
The color: red.  The word Zechariah uses to indicate the red horse’s color is adom, a word derived from a root which is identical to the root from which the words adam (man made from earth) and adama (ground, land, red arable soil) are derived.
The strong nuclear force makes nucleons and nuclei, in which most of the universe’s mass is contained.  It is a long shot to compare a nucleus to the earth’s soil, and electrons to the liveliness upon it, but the connection to the soon-to-be-plowing calf is obvious.
Attribute: Great sword 
The sword is a proximity weapon.  The only other horseman equipped with a sword is the green horseman. 
The strong nuclear force is a local force.  It is also such a strong force that the power harnessed by it was once used to destroy Hiroshima and Nagasaki.  The only other force that works in the nucleus is the weak nuclear force.  Compared to the sword of the weak force, the strong nuclear force's is truly great.
Activity 1: Take peace from the earth. 
At the release of the strong nuclear force, the mass-dominated era begins.
Activity 2: Make men slay each other.
Cause men (man; adam) to slay one another.  In Greek, this verb indicates the act of slaying.  In Hebrew, the sentiment would be to fall upon each other—guided by a force.
Quarks, which are receptive to the strong nuclear force, do not occur free in nature but are always bound into nucleons.

 
Chapter 18.3 The Black Horseman of Revelation 6
When He broke the third seal, I heard the third living creature saying, "Come."  I looked, and behold, a black horse; and he who sat on it had a pair of scales in his hand.  And I heard something like a voice in the center of the four living creatures saying, "A quart of wheat for a denarius, and three quarts of barley for a denarius; and do not damage the oil and the wine." [1]
-Revelation 6:5-6 (NASB)
- The Third of the Four Horsemen -
 	The four horsemen of Revelation 6 appear to be congruent with the four natural forces.  The black horseman is highly similar to the Electromagnetism.
 
 	The Black Horse of Revelation 6
Electromagnetism
 


Sequential: Third
The black horse shows up third.
Breaks free from the final symmetry together with the weak nuclear force, so this would be a mild discrepancy in the parallel.  Since this is a self-similarity, mild discrepancies are allowed.
 
The living creature: Man 
Though strongly challenged by some, many will agree that humanity is separated from the animal realm by his ability of contemplative thought. 
Just like man is an animal, but one with a very lively mind, electromagnetism is a force, but a very lively one.  Where the other forces simply combine or break apart, EM causes activity that is far less linear.  EM allows chemical processes to occur.  EM builds atoms, gives them life, and means to ‘communicate’ and combine, rather than simply bumping into each other.
The color: Black
Black is complementary to white.
Electromagnetism is kindred to gravity in that both are long distance forces.  Photons only luminesce when they hit an object.  We can see that when at night the sky is dark but still doused with photons, evidenced by the moon that lights up because of it.  Black is the color of receptivity.  That is probably why the Bride is black (and not white!  See Song of Solomon 1:5).
Attribute: Scales 
Scales in Scripture are either used literally, to conduct economy, or figuratively, to ‘weigh’ issues and derive conclusions.  Both uses require some intelligence. 
Where gravity has a ‘the more the merrier’ attitude and the strong nuclear force combines quarks either into threesomes or twosomes and never anything else, EM always seeks to balance positive and negative charges, no matter how much of each are there to work with.  EM causes the economy of matter that is needed to run the universe and the life that came from it.
Activity 
From the center of the four living creatures comes a voice.  (The horseman himself does not do anything).  This seems to indicate that the work of the black horseman unites the forces in such a way that a singular voice rises from the accompanying creatures.
Life most certainly requires all four forces, but is essentially based on EM.
The Voice
The voice says: “A choenix of wheat for a denarius, and three choenixes of barley for a denarius; and do not misuse the oil and the wine.”
The equation seems to indicate that one unit of wheat is worth three units of barley.  Barley was predominantly used as fodder for animals (calf: strong nuclear force), while wheat was consumed by people (man: electromagnetism).
The electrical charges of one proton (a threesome of quarks) and that of one electron are balanced.
Oil; from squeezed olives.  Oil heals, gives light and with it all men of clerical sovereignty (kings, priests and prophets) where anointed.  The word Christ actually means ‘anointed one’.  Gethsemane means olive press.
Wine; from squeezed grapes.  Used in Scriptures to indicate either spirits or spirited people.

 
Chapter 18.4 The Green Horseman of Revelation 6
When the Lamb broke the fourth seal, I heard the voice of the fourth living creature saying, "Come."  I looked, and behold, an ashen horse; and he who sat on it had the name Death; and Hades was following with him.  Authority was given to them over a fourth of the earth, to kill with sword and with famine and with pestilence and by the wild beasts of the earth. [1]
-Revelation 6:7-8 (NASB)
- The Fourth of the Four Horsemen -
The four horsemen of Revelation 6 appear to be congruent with the four natural forces.  The green horseman is highly similar to the Weak Nuclear Force.

 	The green horse
The weak nuclear force
 

Sequential: Fourth
The green horse shows up fourth.
The weak nuclear force shows up together with electromagnetism; the third and fourth forces.
The living creature: Vulture 
A flying, rapacious bird; a vulture  rather than an eagle as most translations suggest.  Vultures, of course, feed on carcasses such as dead cows.  A vulture in flight scouts in search of the dead, weak or wounded. 
The bosons of the weak nuclear force prowl the material realm in search of particles or compounds that are unstable and need to be done away with.  Radioactivity is one of the key words in regards to this force.  The weak nuclear force is the only force that undoes.
The color: Green
Many translations position a grey or pale horse here.  But the word is chloros, as in chlorophyll; vegetation green.  John saw a green horse.
Green is complementary to red.  Green is the color of rejuvenation and rebirth (the color of spring).  As peculiar as it may seem, ancient Greek literature has been known to deem honey green.  The consumption of honey may give a weary worrier new strength
The weak force is the digestive force of nature.  Since the universe is based on freedom, all kinds of instabilities may freely arise with the best and brightest.  And unstable building blocks may cause the entire building to collapse.  The weak nuclear force takes dissonants out of commission and from their energy, more stable particles are forged.  The weak nuclear force is kindred to the strong nuclear force in that both are limited to the atom's nucleus.
Attribute 1: Name 
The name; Death.
Remember the golden rule of quantum mechanics: If it can happen, it must happen?  Here is an application: If you can die, you must die.  The good news is that according to Scriptures, those who believe (that is, know) Christ, cannot die, and this green horseman will surely pass by, just as it passes by on electrons, protons, bound neutrons and e-neutrino's.
Attribute 2: Hades 
Hades or a-idein means something quite disturbing.  The particle ‘a’ means ‘not,’ while the second part of the word Hades is the infinitive of the verb eido, or to see/know/experience.  A suited translation of this horrible word would thus be: Oblivion.  The people that exist in Oblivion are the forgotten people; the people that have managed to live their lives in such a way that they have not mattered, and will therefore not be remembered.  A complete and utter waste.
In that awful place called Oblivion are most of the particles that were alive immediately after the Beginning.  Until the twentieth century, there was no evidence whatsoever that hugely powerful particles such as the top-quark or the tau-lepton had ever existed, as they constitute no part of the world we live in.  How very, very peculiar therefore is the discovery of the existence of these particles.  Humanity has followed Christ into Hades, and the first batch of forgotten creatures has been brought back into mind, as if the gates of Oblivion are opened up for all the world to marvel at what it once devoured.
Attribute 3: Authority
Authority over the fourth of the earth, to kill.  Very tough verse.  The Greek uses the word epi in combination with the accusative, which may either indicate that this horseman has authority for the duration of the fourth, or that his authority stretches from its initiation up to the completion of "the fourth".
The Chaotic Set Theory, which we will address in the pages to come, suggests that creation is entirely organized as a seven-zone matrix.  The work of the green horseman is largely conducted in the fourth zone, and does not exceed the fourth zone.
Attribute 4: Sword
The weak nuclear force is a local force, just like the strong nuclear force.  Note that this sword is not 'great,' as is the sword of the strong nuclear force. 
The two nuclear forces are named strong and weak for the obvious reason that the strong nuclear force is a lot stronger than the weak force.
Attribute 5: Famine 
As the energy density lessened, larger particles had more trouble to arise and to maintain themselves during the era of quark slaughter.
Attribute 6: Wild beasts of the earth
Wild beasts of the earth.  The word used here (theria) predominantly describes the not domesticated animals.  By the manner in which the Greek of this particular line is organized, it seems that Death himself wields sword, famine and death, while the wild beasts are allies instead of instrumental agents of the green reaper.
If the bosons of the weak nuclear force are likened to flying vultures, then perhaps the image of wild beasts answers to the period of violent thermodynamics when particles collided so energetically that they would transform into other particles, some of which were to be unstable and devoured by the weak bosons.
In the next chapter, we will have a look at the development of the family of Abraham.  We will take along the following images from the horses’ paragraph: 
Bosons, or force particles, are likened to horses.
The bow is related to gravity.
 
Abraham and the Standard Model in Genesis.
- Nuclear Physics in an Ancient Document -
"And I will make your offspring like the dust of the earth..." [5]
- Genesis 13:16 (NIV)
Significance of Abraham as point in the development of man
When Jesus was asked about the nature and specifically some marital consequences of the resurrection, He responded with a verbal shrug and said:
"’But about the resurrection of the dead, have you not read what God said to you, I AM the God of Abraham, the God of Isaac, and the God of Jacob?  He is not the God of the dead but of the living.’  And when the crowds heard this, they were astonished at His teaching” [5] 
- Matt 22, NIV
We westerners like to link our calendar to the birth of Christ and speak of BC and AD, but before Christ, the most pivotal point in the development of humankind was Abraham.  Abraham believed God and was considered righteous and immortal, even though he obviously departed from his earthly body.
“For what saith the scripture?  Abraham believed God, and it was counted unto him for righteousness.” [8]  
- Romans 4:3 (KJV)
Abraham was the first to have this happen to; before Abraham there was no eternal life—due to the Fall of Man.  Some may argue that certainly folks like Adam and Enoch and Noah will be present at the resurrection, and yes, this may or may not be so, but the keyword in regards to the Abrahamic stage is continuum.  God cut a covenant with Abraham that has been continuously upheld; there is an uninterrupted conduit of trans-mortal existence that runs from Genesis 15 all the way across Scripture from Abraham, through Isaac, Jacob, the tribes of Israel, the Tabernacle, Temple and finally Christ and the Body of Christ.
The proceedings before Abraham are certainly significant in the bringing forth of the post-Abrahamic period, but they are of a completely different reality.  Things that really mattered after Abraham were not around before him.  After Abraham, reality was derived from absolute novelty.  Before Abraham, all things were different. 
Abram's (or Abraham's) family
Abram was a son of Terah.  Abram's two brothers were called Nahor and Haran, and their half-sister (same father) was called Sarai.  Haran had two daughters and a son.  Nahor married one of the daughters, and when Haran died, Abram adopted Haran's son Lot.  That is when the journey truly began.
Names in Scripture are often very important.  Especially when names are changed, the focus is drawn towards the meaning of them.  And names change only when something very important is going on.  Abram became Abraham, and Sarai became Sarah when the trans-mortal conduit was initialized.  Jacob became Israel when Scriptures first acknowledged the personhood of a many.  Hosea became Josuah (Numbers 13) when the first Israelites were to scout out the Promised Land (a premonition of the apocalyptic New Earth; Joshua is the Hebrew form of the Greek name Jesus).  And in the New Testament, Jesus gives His disciple Simon the name Peter, which means rock, because ‘on this rock I will build my church’.
It is in this light that our attention is drawn towards the name Nahor.  This name comes from a verb that is reserved to describe the vigorous snorting of horses, and the image of horses would later be used by John the Revelator in his famous horseman-passage that is highly similar to a description of the four natural forces (see chapter 16). 
Nahor marries his niece Milcah and keeps a concubine on the side, whose name is Reumah.  Immediately after the scene in which Abraham almost sacrifices his son Isaac on Mount Moriah (the same hill upon which David had Solomon build the Temple; one of the mountains of Jerusalem), Abraham was told about the offspring of his brother Nahor (Gen 22:20-24).  Nahor's wife Milcah had borne him eight sons; his concubine Reumah had borne him four sons.  The bosons of the Standard Model are organized in exactly the same way: eight strong nuclear bosons; four electroweak bosons.  Three of the electroweak bosons would later carry the weak nuclear force.  Their names are Tebah (Slayer), Maacah (Squeezer), and Gaham (Burner).
Abraham has two sons during his marriage to Sarah: Ishmael with Hagar the Egyptian slave woman, and Isaac with Sarah. 
Although God tells Abraham that Isaac will be the keeper of the covenant, Ishmael will also be greatly blessed and made into a great nation.  From Ishmael will come 12 rulers (Gen 17:20) as he marries an Egyptian woman (21:21), and he will become an archer, a man of the bow (21:20).  The sons of Ishmael are therefore three quarters Egyptian, which practically would render them full Egyptian status.
The Standard Model tells us about two groups of 12 particles: Leptons and quarks.  Quarks are associated with the mass of the universe; they are the ones most responsible for space-time curvature, the attribute of gravity, the bow of the white horseman.
Much later, the prophet Isaiah lists the tribes that are to be gathered onto the Kingdom of God.  Only Kedar and Nebaioth remain (60:7).  The Bride from the Song of Songs compares her own blackness to that of Kedar's camps.  After the era of quark slaughter only two quarks remain: Up and Down.  The down-quark has the same direction of electrical charge as the electron (both negative).
Abraham's son Isaac has two sons with Rebeccah, Esau and Jacob.  Jacob continues to have 12 sons, which would later be the 12 tribes of Israel, congruent with the 12 leptons of the Standard Model. 
Famine strikes the land; the universe ‘expands’ and energy density decreases.  The people of Israel move to Egypt because there is food.  The mass dominated era is at full swing.  The heaviest lepton is more massive than the lightest few quarks.  Joseph becomes vice-roi of Egypt but as quarks begin to combine, even the heaviest leptons are dwarfed.  A period of lepton-enslavement ensues and is concluded when the strong-electroweak symmetry breaches and Moses leads the people out of bondage.
Israel becomes her own political entity.  She organizes, receives law and starts to occupy a land.  Then she becomes a kingdom, first Saul, then David and finally Solomon who rules over a peaceful nation that contains all the tribes of Israel.
After Solomon's death, the nation of Israel breaches.  The lepton family does likewise.  As the electroweak force breaches into electromagnetism and the weak nuclear force, the once symmetrical lepton family breaks apart into leptons that are receptive to the photons of electromagnetism and those who are not.  But at the same time, the conditions of the universe made it impossible for the larger leptons and the anti-particles to remain, and only two leptons made it through: the electron (receptive) and the e-neutrino (not receptive).
The united kingdom of Israel falls apart into a ten-tribe part that keeps the name Israel, and Judah, which consists of two tribes: Judah and Simeon.  Simeon was a full brother of Judah and the inheritance of this tribe fell within the borders of Judah.  Then the empires arise.  Assyria carries off the ten-tribe part and these people are never heard from again (most likely they were assimilated into the Assyrian population).  Babylon carries off Judah (and Simeon anonymously within its borders), and the amazing stories of Daniel and Esther follow.  Nebuchadnezzar, the emperor of Babylon and probably the most powerful man at that time, converts to the God of Daniel and proclaims his empire subject to the Living God.  Later Esther becomes the wife of (the now Persian) emperor Xerxes who reigned a region that stretched from India to Ethiopia, averts the holocaust intended by Haman and causes the people of Judah to be given their pride back.  Soon after, a man named Zerubabel leads a group of Jews back to Canaan.  Ezra and Nehemiah follow.  The wall of Jerusalem is rebuilt.  So is the Temple.
Ezra, who must have been quite familiar with the Law (that is the Torah), reads the Torah and discovers something which he had never discovered before.  It changes his look on the Text drastically, and he recognizes the importance of educating his people.  But the people were speaking Aramaic by now and needed to have the Torah explained to them.  Ezra instituted a group of ‘explainers’ whose sole function was to explain the Torah to the people.  Soon the living Spirit of the Torah became neglected in favor of a rigid system of deterministic rulers.  The rabbinic period followed.  Explainers arose who explained the explainers, and commentary upon commentary was written.
The Greeks conquered Persia, the world adapted to the Greek tongue.  The Scriptures were translated into a Greek version called the Septuagint.  Then the Romans came, and a cry of liberation was heard; not only liberation from Roman or any other kind of rule, but also from the contaminating and mutilating religion that obstructed a clear view on the ancient revelations.
In those days, Caesar Augustus issued a decree that a census should be taken of the entire Roman world.  This was the first census that took place while Quirinius was governor of Syria.  And everyone went to his town to register.  And while a man named Joseph took his pregnant finance Mary to Bethlehem, the town of his ancestor King David, a few Persian astronomers witnessed a celestial event that would lead them to the house in which a Child was born.  And the Child was named Jesus.  And it was Him of whom Isaiah had said: 
“’The people walking in darkness have seen a great light.  On those living in the land of the shadow of death a light has dawned…  For to us a Child is born, to us a Son is given.  And the government will be on His shoulders.  And He will be called Wonderful Counselor, Mighty God, Everlasting Father, Prince of Peace.” [5] 
- Isaiah 9:2-7 (NIV)
At the age of thirty, Jesus took up preaching.  His message was initially aimed at Israel, but after His ascension and the pouring out of God's Spirit, the message became available for all people.  Through Christ, the people of planet earth could be united in a way no one could have held possible before.  The trans-mortal conduit initialized in Abraham had produced life.  The surviving leptons and quarks combined into hydrogen atoms.  The universe became transparent and filled with light.  Time and space began. 
 
Summary of the parallel between the Standard Model and Abraham's family
Matter 
Mind 

Sub-polarization : quantum, no permanent existence, no continuum	Pre-Abraham : no continuum, no immortality.
Fermions ; 2 groups of 12
Sons of Abraham ; 2 groups of 12, and more
Bosons ; 12, which breach into 8+4, which breach into 8+3+1	Sons of Nahor ; 8+4
Quarks ; 12 massive, space-time curvers
Ishmaelites ; 12 sons of an archer
Leptons ; 12
Israelites ; 12 tribes
Strong electroweak symmetry breach
The Exodus ; Israel departs from Egypt.

Nucleosynthesis.  The strong nuclear force (in John's passage accompanied by a calf) forges quarks into protons.
Israel demands a tactile god and makes a golden calf.  The calf is destroyed and the Law and the Tabernacle are deployed.

Electroweak symmetry breach	Loss of the united kingdom after Solomon
After the quark slaughter only two quarks remain, Up and Down	Isaiah's prophesy makes mention of only Kedar and Nebaioth; The Bride likens her color to that of Kedar's camp.
Only two leptons remain , the electron and the illusive e-neutrino
Only two tribes remain , Judah (the Jews) and Simeon hidden in Judah
Hydrogen formation.  The universe becomes transparent; space-time begins.  Particles bond and live forever.	In Christ the covenant pours from the Israeli basin towards the entire human species.  Two formerly irreconcilable groups (Jews and gentiles) become interconnected.  True bonding between humans begins to be possible.  Eternal life begins.

The evolution of the Standard Model compared with the family of Abraham:
 	 

The Standard Model and the family of Abraham are self-similar.  That means that they are hugely alike, but also that they have to have some differences. 
 
The Seventy Weeks of Daniel
- Days, weeks, years and calendars -
20 Now while I was speaking and praying, and confessing my sin and the sin of my people Israel, and presenting my supplication before the LORD my God in behalf of the holy mountain of my God, 21 while I was still speaking in prayer, then the man Gabriel, whom I had seen in the vision previously, came to me in my extreme weariness about the time of the evening offering.  22 He gave me instruction and talked with me and said, “O Daniel, I have now come forth to give you insight with understanding.  23 “At the beginning of your supplications the command was issued, and I have come to tell you, for you are highly esteemed; so give heed to the message and gain understanding of the vision.  24 “Seventy weeks have been decreed for your people and your holy city, to finish the transgression, to make an end of sin, to make atonement for iniquity, to bring in everlasting righteousness, to seal up vision and prophecy and to anoint the most holy place.  25 “So you are to know and discern that from the issuing of a decree to restore and rebuild Jerusalem until Messiah the Prince there will be seven weeks and sixty-two weeks; it will be built again, with plaza and moat, even in times of distress.  26 “Then after the sixty-two weeks the Messiah will be cut off and have nothing, and the people of the prince who is to come will destroy the city and the sanctuary.  And its end will come with a flood; even to the end there will be war; desolations are determined.  27 “And he will make a firm covenant with the many for one week, but in the middle of the week he will put a stop to sacrifice and grain offering; and on the wing of abominations will come one who makes desolate, even until a complete destruction, one that is decreed, is poured out on the one who makes desolate.” [1]
- Daniel 9:20-27 (NASB)
Weeks in Daniel 9
The Hebrew word translated twice as ‘weeks’ in verse 24 is ‘sâbu‘îm’, meaning ‘seventy sevens’.  This Hebrew word appears first as a plural noun, followed by the participle form, functioning as an adjective.  That this Hebrew phrase should be rendered as ‘seventy sevens’, or ‘seventy weeks of years’, is unanimously agreed upon by representatives of all interpretative schools.  There is also great consensus that the ‘seventy sevens’ refers to years, since this is what Daniel was contemplating in Jeremiah 25:11-12; 29:10-14, as evident in Daniel 9:2.  Thus, our Lord has in mind seventy weeks of years, or 490 years.
Calendars, Calendars…and Conversions
Time is easy for us to measure.  There are 24 hours in a day, 7 days in a week, 52 weeks in a year—that is 365 days in a year.  Wait a minute!  Where does leap year fit in—there is an extra day.  Wait a minute!  Was there a mistake discovered in the calendar in the 14th Century?  Oh no…which calendar?  What?  There is more than one calendar?  What is going on here?
Actually, you need to consider three calendars—the Jewish calendar, the Julian calendar, and the Gregorian calendar (and probably the Babylonian calendar—which lives on to some degree in the Jewish calendar)—to properly interpret Daniel 9:20-27.
The Julian Calendar
For many European institutions, we can thank the Romans (for good or for bad, though they too had their predecessors in the Greeks, Egyptians and Babylonians).  So it is with the solar calendar currently in widespread use. 
Originally the Romans numbered years ab urbe condita (a.u.c.), that is, ‘from the founding of the city’ (of Rome, where much of the character of the modern world had its beginnings).  Had this old calendar remained in use, 1996-01-14 would have been New Year's Day in the year 2749 a.u.c. 
Following his conquest of Egypt in 48 B.C. Julius Caesar  consulted the Alexandrian astronomer Sosigenes about calendar reform, since the a.u.c. calendar then used by the Romans was completely inadequate to the needs of the emerging empire—which Caesar was poised to command, briefly as it turned out.  The calendar which Julius Caesar adopted in the year 709 a.u.c. (what we now call 46 B.C.) was identical to the Alexandrian Aristarchus' calendar of 239 B.C., and consisted of a solar year of twelve months and of 365 days with an extra day every fourth year.  It is unclear as to where or how Aristarchus arrived at this calendar, but one may speculate that Babylonian science was involved. 
As we can read in the excellent article, "The Western Calendar and Calendar Reforms" in the Encyclopedia Britannica, Sosigenes decided that the year known in modern times as 46 B.C. should have two intercalations.  The first was the customary intercalation of 23 days following February 23, the second, to bring the calendar in step with the equinoxes , was achieved by inserting two additional months between the end of November and the beginning of December.  This insertion amounted to an addition of 67 days, making a year of no less than 445 days and causing the beginning of March, 45 B.C. in the Roman republican calendar, to fall on what is still called January 1 of the Julian calendar.” [65]
Julius Caesar wanted to start the year on the Spring Equinox or the Winter Solstice, but the Senate, which traditionally took office on January 1st, the start of the Roman civil calendar year, wanted to keep January 1st as the start of the year, and Caesar yielded in a political compromise. 
The Roman date-keepers initially misunderstood Caesar's instructions concerning the new calendar (according to Macrobius  [66]), and erroneously held every third year, rather than every fourth year, to be a leap year.  There is some dispute as to exactly which years from 43 B.C. through to 8 A.D. were actually leap years, but a reconstruction which is consistent with the available evidence is that every third year following 43 B.C. (i.e. 40 B.C., 37 B.C., etc.) was a leap year, until 10 B.C., after which, according to this hypothesis, Augustus Caesar  (Julius Caesar's successor) suspended leap years, reinstating them with the leap year of 4 A.D. [67] 
Another source of uncertainty regarding exact dating of days at this time derives from changes made by Augustus to the lengths of the months.  According to some accounts, originally the month of February had 29 days and in leap years 30 days (unlike 28 and 29 now).  It lost a day because at some point the fifth and six months of the old Roman calendar were renamed as Julius and Augustus respectively, in honor of their eponyms.  Then the number of days in August—previously 30—now became 31 (the same as the number of days in July), so that Augustus Caesar would not be regarded as inferior to Julius Caesar.  The extra day needed for August was taken from the end of February. [67] However, there is still no certainty regarding these matters, so all dates prior to A.D. 4, when the Julian calendar finally stabilized, are uncertain! 
Subsequently the Julian calendar became widespread as a result of its use throughout the Roman Empire and later by various Christian churches, which inherited many of the institutions of the Roman world. 
The system of numbering years A.D. (for ‘Anno Domini’) was instituted in about the year 527 A.D. by the Roman abbot Dionysius Exiguus, who reckoned that the Incarnation had occurred on March 25 in the year 754 A.U.C., with the birth of Jesus occurring nine months later.  Thus, he designated the year 754 A.U.C. as the year 1 A.D.  It is generally thought that his estimate of the time of this event was off by a few years (and there is even uncertainty as to whether he identified 1 A.D. with 754 A.U.C. or 753 A.U.C.). [67] 
The question has been raised as to whether the first Christian millennium should be counted from 1 A.D. or from the year preceding it.  According to Dionysius the Incarnation occurred on March 25th of the year preceding 1 A.D. (with the birth of Jesus occurring nine months later on December 25th), so it is reasonable to regard that year, rather than 1 A.D. as the first year of the Christian Era.  In that case, 1 A.D. is the second year, and 999 A.D. is the 1000th year, of the first Christian millennium, implying that 1999 A.D. is the final year of the second Christian millennium and 2000 A.D. the first year of the third. [67] 
The Gregorian Reform
The average length of a year in the Julian calendar is 365.25 days (one additional day being added every four years).  This is significantly different from the ‘real’ length of the solar year.  However, there is uncertainty among astronomers as to what the true length of the solar year.  The main competing values seem to be the "mean tropical year" of 365.2422 days (‘mean solar days’) and the "vernal equinox year" of 365.2424 days.  The difference of the length of the Julian calendar year from the length of the real solar year is thus 0.0078 days (11.23 minutes) in the former case and 0.0076 days (10.94 minutes) in the latter case. [67] 
Whatever, this error accumulates so that after about 131 years the calendar is out-of-sync with the equinoxes and solstices by one day.  Thus as the centuries passed the Julian calendar became increasingly inaccurate with respect to the seasons.  This was especially troubling to the Roman Catholic Church because it affected the determination of the date of Easter, which, by the 16th Century, was well on the way to slipping into Summer. 
Pope Paul III recruited several astronomers, principally the Jesuit Christopher Clavius (1537-1612), to come up with a solution.  They built upon calendar reform proposals by the astronomer and physician Luigi Lilio (d. 1576).  When Pope Gregory XIII was elected, he found various proposals for calendar reform before him, and decided in favor of that of Clavius.  On 1582-02-24 he issued a papal bull, Inter Gravissimas, establishing what is now called the Gregorian Calendar reform. [67] (The full text may be read in both the Latin original and a French translation by Rudolphe Audette, and in an English translation, recently done by Bill Spencer. [68]) 
The Gregorian reform consisted of the following [67]: 
	Ten days were omitted from the calendar, and it was decreed that the day following (Thursday) October 4, 1582 (which is October 5, 1582, in the old calendar) would thenceforth be known as (Friday) October 15, 1582. 
	The rule for leap years was changed.  In the Julian calendar, a year is a leap year if it is divisible by 4.  In the Gregorian calendar a year is a leap year if either (i) it is divisible by 4 but not by 100 or (ii) it is divisible by 400.  In other words, a year which is divisible by 4 is a leap year unless it is divisible by 100 but not by 400 (in which case it is not a leap year).  Thus, the years 1600 and 2000 are leap years, but 1700, 1800, 1900 and 2100 are not. 
	New rules for the determination of the date of Easter were adopted. 
	The position of the extra day in a leap year was moved from the day before February 25th to the day following February 28th. 
 
Permanent Gregorian calendar: Find the day of the week (So.-Sa.) for each calendar date from the 15th October 1582. [69]
According to some, the term "leap year" derives from the fact that the day of the week on which certain festivals were held normally advanced by one day (since 365=7*52+1), but in years with an extra day the festivals would "leap" to the weekday following that.  However, it may be derived from an old Norwegian word "hlaupâr" which entered the English language at the time of the Viking invasions (8th - 10th Centuries). 
In his excellent book Marking Time, Duncan Steel remarks that it is often claimed that part of the Gregorian reform consisted in setting the first day of the year (New Year's Day) to January 1st, but that in fact the papal bull made no reference to the date of New Year's Day. [70] January 1st was already New Year's Day in many European countries.  The ecclesiastical New Year coincided with Christmas Day until Pope Pius X changed it to January 1st in 1910 (coming into effect in 1911). 
One may note that there was no necessity for omitting ten days, rather than, say, twelve days from the calendar.  In fact, the calendar could have been reformed without omitting any days at all, since only the new rule for leap years is required to keep the calendar synchronized with the vernal equinoxes.  The number of days omitted determines the date for the Spring equinox, an omission of ten days resulting in a date usually of March 20th. 
The vernal equinox year during the last 2000 years is 365.2424 days.  The average length of the Julian year (365.25 days) differs from this value by 0.0076 days.  So from the year 1 to the year 1582 the calendar drifted off the vernal equinox year by 1581*0.0076=12.02 days.  Why didn't Pope Gregory remove twelve days, instead of just ten?  It has to do with the First Council of Nicea, which was held in Nicea (now Iznik, Turkey) in the year 325 CE.  One of the matters settled by this council was the method for determining the date of Easter (which should occur around the vernal equinox), so as to make it independent of the Jewish Calendar.  From the year 325 to the year 1582 the calendar diverged (from the vernal equinox) by 1257*0.0076=9.55 days, so ten days were removed in an attempt to restore the date of the vernal equinox to (about) the same date of the year at which it had occurred at the time of the Council of Nicea. 
The matter is not this simple, however, because the date of the vernal equinox in the calendar of the Roman Catholic Church as established by the Council of Nicea (in 325 A.D.) is March 21, but the effect of removing ten days in 1582 had the result that the vernal equinox occurs in the Gregorian Calendar mostly on March 20, less often on March 21, sometimes on March 19 and sometimes even on March 22 according to local time in the Far East. So should Pope Gregory have omitted nine days?  Or perhaps eleven?  Presumably, Pope Gregory's astronomical advisors considered all three possibilities.  Some say that the choice of ten was a compromise, supported by the fact that the omission of ten days made it easier to correct old calendars simply by the insertion of an ‘X’ (the Latin numeral for ‘10’). 
In fact, a non-Gregorian calendar reform (involving a 33-year cycle and a prime meridian running through Virginia) would have stabilized the vernal equinox at March 21 for the whole world, but this possibility (assuming the Pope considered it) was rejected, presumably on political grounds. 
Adoption of the Gregorian Calendar
The Gregorian calendar was adopted immediately upon the promulgation of Pope Gregory's decree in the Catholic countries of Italy, Spain, Portugal and Poland, and shortly thereafter in France and Luxembourg.  During the next year or two most Catholic regions of Germany, Belgium, Switzerland and the Netherlands came on board.  Hungary followed in 1587.  The rest of the Netherlands, Denmark, Germany and Switzerland made the change during 1699 to 1701.  By the time the British were ready to go along with the rest of Europe, the old calendar had drifted off by one more day, requiring a correction of eleven days, rather than ten.  Britain adopted the Gregorian calendar (and in the British colonies) in 1752, with (Wednesday) September 2, 1752, being followed immediately by (Thursday) September 14, 1752. [67] 
In many countries, the general population used the Julian calendar long after the official introduction of the Gregorian calendar.  Thus, events were recorded in the 16th to 18th Centuries with various dates, depending on which calendar was used.  Dates recorded in the Julian calendar were marked ‘O.S.’ for ‘Old Style’, and those in the Gregorian calendar were marked ‘N.S.’ for ‘New Style’. [67] 
To complicate matters further New Year’s Day, the first day of the new year, was celebrated in different countries, and sometimes by different groups of people within the same country, on January 1, March 1, March 25 or December 25.  January 1 seems to have been the usual date but there was no standard observed.  With the introduction of the Gregorian calendar in Britain and the colonies, New Year's Day was generally observed on January 1.  Previously in the colonies it was common for March 24 of one year to be followed by March 25 of the next year.  This explains why, with the calendrical reform and the shift of New Year’s Day from March 25 back to January 1, the year of George Washington's birth changed from 1731 to 1732.  In the Julian calendar, his birthdate is 1731-02-11 but in the Gregorian Calendar, it is 1732-02-22. [67] 
Sweden adopted the Gregorian calendar in 1753, Japan in 1873, Egypt in 1875, Eastern Europe during 1912 to 1919 and Turkey in 1927.  Following the Bolshevik Revolution in Russia it was decreed that thirteen days would be omitted from the calendar, the day following January 31, 1918, O.S. becoming February 14, 1918, N.S. [67] 
In 1923, the Eastern Orthodox Churches adopted a modified form of the Gregorian calendar in an attempt to render the calendar more accurate (see below).  October 1, 1923, in the Julian calendar became October 14, 1923, in the Eastern Orthodox calendar.  The date of Easter is determined by reference to modern lunar astronomy (in contrast to the more approximate lunar model of the Gregorian system). [67] 
The Gregorian calendar is the calendar that is currently in use in all Western and Westernized countries, and Dionysius Exiguus's system of numbering years A.D. has endured to the present time. 
The abbreviation A.D. is short for ‘Anni Domini Nostri Jesu Christi’, i.e., ‘in the year of Our Lord Jesus Christ’.  Since Muslims, Jews, etc., may not be entirely comfortable with this, the designation ‘A.D.’ is now sometimes replaced by the more neutral C.E. (for ‘Christian Era’), and instead of B.C. (‘Before Christ’) B.C.E. (for ‘Before Christian Era’) is sometimes used. 
CE is also an abbreviation of ‘Common Era’.  The Common Era Calendar is the same as the Gregorian Calendar except that instead of numbering years BC/AD the astronomical system of year numbering is used (this system is explained in the next section).  In this chapter (and elsewhere in this book) dates designated ‘CE’ are almost always dates in this Common Era Calendar.  Note that ‘BCE’ is not used with dates in the Common Era Calendar.  The date 2 BCE, meaning the year 2 ‘before Christian Era’, a.k.a. 2 BC, is the same as the year -1 CE. 
Astronomical Year Numbering
Astronomers designate years prior to 1 A.D. by means of zero and negative numbers, according to the sequence of numbers ..., -2, -1, 0, 1, 2, .... Between the year 1 and the "year "-1 there occurs the year 0.  Thus, astronomers adopt the following convention [67]: 
1 A.D. = 1 C.E. =  year 1
1 B.C. = 1 B.C.E. = year 0
2 B.C. = 2 B.C.E. = "year"  -1 and so on
More generally, a year popularly designated n B.C. or n B.C.E. is designated by astronomers as the year -(n-1). 
The graph [69] below shows the date (in GMT) of the summer solstice (the moment the sun reaches it northernmost position in the sky, or the beginning of summer in the northern hemisphere) through the years.  As the summer solstice occurs on the same astronomical date each year (although changes may occur on much larger time scales), the graph shows the difference between real, astronomical time and the Gregorian calendar.  Each year, the Gregorian calendar is approximately 0.26 day faster than the astronomical calendar, which is corrected by a leap day once every four years.  This 4-year cycle is clearly visible in the graph.  To compensate for the largest part of the remainder of the difference, there is no leap year in 1800, 1900, 2100, and 2200, as can be clearly seen in the graph, too. 
 Note that the summer solstice in 1800 and in 2200 are not on equal dates; this shows that the leap year compensation as describes before is not perfect and more complicated schemes are necessary to keep the Gregorian calendar synchronized over even longer time scales.
As noted above, the Common Era Calendar is the same as the Gregorian calendar except that instead of numbering years BC/AD the astronomical system of year numbering is used. 
The choice of which system of numbering years to use is relevant to the question: When Does the New Millennium Begin?  as can be seen from the following [67]: 
Gregorian	Religiously	Common Era
Calendar	Neutral	Calendar
3 BC	3 BCE	-2 CE
2 BC	2 BCE	-1 CE
	CE millennium begins
0-01-01 CE
1 BC	1 BCE	0 CE
	Gregorian millennium usually taken to begin	1-1-1 AD
1 AD	1 CE	1 CE
2 AD	2 CE	2 CE
...	...	...
1998 AD	1998 CE	1998 CE
1999 AD	1999 CE	1999 CE
	CE millennium ends
1999-12-31 CE
	CE millennium begins
2000-01-01 CE
2000 AD	2000 CE	2000 CE
	Gregorian millennium usually taken to end	2000-12-31 AD
	Gregorian millennium usually taken to begin	2001-1-1 AD
2001 AD	2001 CE	2001 CE
January 1st, 1 AD is usually taken to be the start of the first Christian millennium, but a case could be made for January 1st, 1 BC (see the comment above concerning the incarnation), which would imply that the third Christian millennium began on January 1st, 2000 AD. 
The Proleptic Julian and Gregorian Calendars
Every date recorded in history prior to October 15, 1582 (Gregorian), such as the coronation of Charlemagne as Holy Roman Emperor on Christmas day in the year 800, is a date in the Julian calendar, since on those dates the Gregorian calendar had not yet been invented. 
However, we can identify particular days prior to October 15, 1582 (Gregorian), by means of dates in the Gregorian calendar simply by projecting the Gregorian dating system back beyond the time of its implementation.  A calendar obtained by extension earlier in time than its invention or implementation is called the "proleptic" version of the calendar, and thus we obtain the proleptic Gregorian calendar.  The Julian Calendar also can be extended backward as the proleptic Julian Calendar [67]. 
For example, even though the Gregorian calendar was implemented on October 15, 1582 (Gregorian) we can still say that the date of the day one year before was October 15, 1581 (Gregorian), even though people alive on that day would have said that the date was October 5, 1581 (the Julian date at that time). 
Similarly, dates after October 15, 1582 (Gregorian) have equivalent, but different, dates in the Julian calendar.  For example, the first version of this article was completed on 1992-10-10 in the Gregorian calendar, but it is also true to say that, it was completed on 1992-09-28 in the Julian Calendar.  As another example, the date of the winter solstice in the year 2012 is 2012-12-21 (Gregorian), which is 2012-12-08 (Julian). 
Thus any day in the history of the Earth, either in the past or in the future, can be specified as a date in either of these two calendrical systems.  The dates will generally be different; in fact, they will be the same only for dates from March 1st, 200, to February 28, 300.  The dates in neither calendar will coincide with the seasons in the distant past or distant future, but that does not affect the validity of these calendars as systems for uniquely identifying particular days. 
Variation in the Tropical Year
The tropical year (a.k.a. the mean solar year) corresponds to the cycle of the seasons.  The exact definition of this concept is currently a matter of debate among some astronomers.  All agree, however, that due to the gravitational dynamics of the Sun-Earth-Moon system the length of the tropical year (however defined) is changing slowly.  The length of the tropical year on 2000-01-01 is calculated by some astronomers to be 365.24218967 days (365 days 5 hours 48 minutes 46 seconds [71]), but at this level of precision the value depends on the definition of the concept.  The value changes significantly with the millennia, however, as follows (according to a formula in common use among astronomers): 
  Year           Length of tropical year in days
 -5000	365.24253
 -4000 	365.24250
 -3000           	365.24246
 -2000          	365.24242
 -1000           	365.24237
         0           	365.24231
  1000           	365.24225
  2000           	365.24219
  3000           	365.24213
  4000           	365.24207
  5000           	365.24201
Thus, the value of the tropical year varies over this 10,000-year timespan by as much as .00052 days (about 45 seconds). 
Accuracy of the Gregorian and Orthodox Calendars
As in any completely rule-based calendar, the Gregorian calendar is not absolutely accurate.  In the Gregorian calendar, the average length of a year is 365.2425 days (since there are 146,097 days in 400 calendar years) [72].  This is a lot closer to the ‘real’ length of the solar year than is the case with the Julian calendar.  As noted above, the main competing values for the length of the solar year are 365.2422 days (the mean tropical year) and 365.2424 days (the vernal equinox year).  The difference of the length of the Gregorian calendar year from the length of the real solar year is thus 0.0003 days (25.9 seconds) in the former case and 0.0001 days (8.6 seconds) in the latter case.  Were the length of the ‘mean solar year’ to be constant this error would accumulate to one day after about 3,336 years (if we use the 365.2422 value) or after about 10,000 years (if we use the 365.2424 value). 
Whereas in the Gregorian Calendar a century year is a leap year only if division of the century number by 4 leaves a remainder of 0, in the Eastern Orthodox system a century year is a leap year only if division of the century number by 9 leaves a remainder of 2 or 6.  This implies an average calendar year length in the Orthodox Calendar of 365.24222 days.  This is very close to the present mean solar value of 365.24219, and the Eastern Orthodox Calendar is at present significantly more accurate in this respect than the Gregorian.  Were the mean solar year to remain constant, the Orthodox Calendar would be off by one day only after about 33,000 years.  However, over the next few millennia the Orthodox calendar, like the Gregorian, will become increasingly inaccurate with respect to the mean solar year until possibly recovering around 10,000 years from now.  However, in terms of the vernal equinox year the Gregorian Calendar is more accurate than the Orthodox and will remain more accurate in the coming millennia. 
True Length of the Tropical Year
The tropical (solar) year has been defined as “the time it takes the Sun to appear to travel around the sky from a given point of the tropical zodiac back to that same point in the tropical zodiac.”  This value depends on where in the Earth’s orbit one begins the measurement of one revolution about the Sun.  If the point used is the point of the vernal equinox then the value is 365.2424 tropical days (so this is the value of the ‘vernal equinox year’).  If one wishes an average value that is the mean of the values obtained by using different orbital starting points, then a value of 365.24219 days emerges.
The Lunar Year?
All would be well and good now, except Daniel was writing his prophetic vision based on the Babylonian calendar (which influenced the Jewish calendar).  The Jewish calendar is not based on the solar year, but rather the lunar year.  There are 30 days in a Jewish calendar month or 360 days in a year.  Oops!  It’s a few days short of a lunar year.  Theologians often refer to the 360-day year as a Prophetic Year.  Thus any old testament prophecy—given in prophetic-years—has to be converted to tropical or solar years.  If we do not consider this conversion in our interpretation, Christ would have been born in about 5 BCE rather than 1 BCE.  Oops!
The Babylonian Calendar
The Babylonian calendar is one of the greatest achievements of Antiquity: it combines a solar and a lunar cycle in such a way that the beginning of the year never wanders far from the Spring equinox.  The basic theoretical principle is well-known: in a cycle of nineteen years, we have twelve years of twelve lunar months and seven years of thirteen months.  Theoretically, dates in ancient Babylonian texts can be converted to our calendar; there are several webpages that offer converters, which are also useful for dates on Jewish calendars.	 
A Babylonian astronomical text from the British Museum.  It mentions the comet of Halley.
And that’s the problem.  The Babylonian calendar is not exactly the same.  In the end, a new month started when the new moon was actually observed, which means that the months could sometimes be one day longer or shorter, depending on the circumstances in Babylon or Jerusalem.
A more or less correct conversion is mentioned in the tables of Parker & Dubberstein, Babylonian Chronology 626 B.C. – A.D. 75 (1956; update 1971).  Now, Dutch astronomer Rob van Gent of Utrecht University has made a calendar converter that’s not derived from the Jewish calendar, but is directly based on Babylonian information.  It’s still not perfect; from the Astronomical Diaries, we know that there are still discrepancies of one or two days.  However, Van Gent’s converter is a giant leap forward.

Do the Math!
Actually, I have already done it for you.  If we take the calendars and conversions into account—that we should with the Biblical model—then Christ was born in 1 BCE .  Daniel was told that 62 weeks would pass between the time the decree to restore and rebuild Jerusalem—establish the 20th year of Artaxerxes reign (Neh. 2:1-8) to get about 444 BC—and the time of Christ’s crucifixion—until Messiah the Prince crowned on the cross.  That places the crucifixion at 476.07 Gregorian years after the decree, which would be 33 AD—adding one to account for no year zero.  Since Jesus’ ministry lasted about 3.5 years before his death, His baptism occurred about 30 AD when he was about 30 years old, according to Luke.
 
Spreadsheet model of the 69 weeks of Daniel.
No way!
Either Daniel calculated his prophetic years after Christ was crucified—implying Daniel wrote his book after the death of Christ—or the prophetic vision of Daniel is extremely accurate.  In fact, taking into account all the calendars and conversions, Daniel predicted the crucifixion to occur on April 1st 33 AD—14 Nisan or the Erev Pesach (Eve of Passover) on the Jewish calendar—which is on a Friday on the Gregorian calendar!
Using the induction method and the Biblical model, we find that prophecy is certain.  Thus faith—the assurance of things hoped for, the conviction [evidence] of things not seen—is more than just wishful thinking.  Faith is grounded in historical and scientific (mathematical and physical), biblical accuracy!
Is this Important?
You bet your sweet bippy!  The rest of what we interpret about biblical prophecy (or historical occurrence) in the Scripture depends on this fact, using the Biblical model—which is holistic and coherent, lacking contradiction!
Keep this in mind as we look at Genesis 1.
 
Some major interpretations of Genesis 1
- Various Creation Theories -
In essence, String Theory describes space and time, matter and energy, gravity and light, indeed all of God's creation... as music. 
-Roy H. Williams
Creation
The creation account tells us where everything came from.  But mankind is so curious about its origins that many billions of dollars have been spent in trying to figure it out.  And because over the last two centuries some deep scientific insights have been gained, the story of Genesis 1 is no longer the sole authority.  Trouble is that Genesis 1 seems to reveal completely different proceedings than the fossil record and the Hubble telescope.
Paul writes in Romans 1:20 that God's invisible qualities, eternal power and divine nature can be clearly seen through what has been made.  The Psalmists exclaim numerous times that the skies declare God’s grace, and creation God’s intent.  We really should not fear to look closely at what has been made and try to learn from it.  Moreover, we certainly should not accept interpretations of Scripture that are obviously flawed, just to have something to believe.  There is no gold that good enough to make a Golden Calf that is either effective for us or pleasing to the Lord.
 
The 6 × 24 Hours Theory
Traditionally, the creation week was seen as six (or seven) periods of 24 hours in which planet earth was created.  Today only small enclaves of traditional churches cling to this interpretation—Young Earth creationism.
Internal Criticism
The seventh day is not concluded and may not be a 24-hour period.  Furthermore, the 24-hour day comes from the rotation of the earth—facing the sun’s rays during the day and away from them during the night.  If the sun was created on the fourth day, where does the ‘light of day’ on day-one come from, and how can the first three days be 24-hour days?
Comparison of major creationist views [73]

	Acceptance	Humanity	Biological species	Earth
Age of Universe
Young Earth creationism
40% (US)[60]
Directly created by God
Directly created by God.  Macroevolution does not occur.	Less than 10,000 years old.  Reshaped by global flood.	Less than 10,000 years old (some hold this view only for our solar system).
Gap creationism
	Directly created by God
Directly created by God.  Macroevolution does not occur.	Scientifically accepted age. Reshaped by global flood.	Scientifically accepted age.
Progressive creationism
38% (US)[60]
Directly created by God (based on primate anatomy)	Direct creation + evolution.  No single common ancestor.	Scientifically accepted age. No global flood.	Scientifically accepted age.
Intelligent design
	Proponents hold various beliefs. e.g. Behe accepts evolution from primates	Divine intervention at some point in the past, as evidenced by what intelligent-design creationists call "irreducible complexity"
Some accept common descent, others not.  Some claim the existence of Earth is the result of divine intervention	Scientifically accepted age
Theistic evolution
16% (US)[60]
Evolution from primates	Evolution from single common ancestor	Scientifically accepted age. No global flood.	Scientifically accepted age
External Criticism
This interpretation is not congruent with the fossil record , which means that either Genesis 1 is inaccurate or the fossil record is.  Some have argued that God created the earth with the fossils in it, in order to test our faith in His Word, but that goes flat against the nature of God as described in Scriptures.  God does not ever lie or trick us by presenting confusing data.
The 6 × 24 theory leaves earth to be approximately 6000 years old, which is not consistent with scientific observations. 
A very strong point of the 6 × 24 theory which cannot be denied
The 6 × 24 theory is the only popular theory that stays true to the Hebrew word ‘yom’, which only means ‘day’ anywhere in Scriptures.  The problem that arises when the fossil record is viewed is however not addressed by this theory, and its yom-victory seems void—unless one looks at the Noahic flood in conjunction with this theory for a young earth interpretation (see box below).
Young Earth Creationism

Young Earth creationists interpret the text of Genesis in a strictly literal fashion.  Therefore, they believe that God created the world in six normal-length days, and planted the Garden of Eden for the habitation of an original human couple (Adam and Eve).
	  [6]

Because of the subsequent Fall of Man, humanity was forced to work hard to provide food, childbirth became painful, and physical death entered the world.  Young Earth creationists believe that prior to the Fall all animals were herbivores.  The Genealogies of Genesis record the line of descent from Adam through Noah to Abraham.  Young Earth creationists interpret these genealogies literally, including the old ages of the men.  For example, Methuselah lived 969 years according to the genealogy.  Differences of opinion exist regarding whether the genealogies should be taken as complete or abbreviated, hence the 6,000 to 10,000 year range usually quoted for the Earth's age.  Proponents of Old Earth Creationism tend to interpret the genealogies as incomplete, and usually interpret the days of Genesis 1 figuratively as long periods of time.
Young Earth creationists believe that the events described in the Genesis deluge myth did occur, were global in extent, and submerged the highest mountains on Earth.  A range of suggestions are made to account for the mechanism for such a deluge.  Earlier generations (following the lead of Morris and Whitcomb) believed that an orbiting vapor canopy collapsed, generating extreme rainfall (from ‘windows of heaven’).  In more recent times, it has been proposed that radical geological activity (the opening of the ‘fountains of the great deep’) was largely responsible for the flood — proposals such as catastrophic plate tectonics and hydroplates have been put forward by some.  These hypotheses have the added benefit of explaining how the flood transformed an originally flatter Earth, raising up mountains and dropping seabeds; this then solves the problem of finding sufficient water to cover Mount Everest.  Whatever the case, almost all Young Earth creationists refer to hypothesized processes of “flood geology” to argue that the vast majority of present-day geological features are the result of the deluge.
To support their belief in a worldwide flood, Young Earth creationists argue that anthropological evidence supports their belief that most of the cultures have, in their history, a myth similar to that of the biblical account in two aspects: 1) the occurrence of a catastrophic flood [74] and 2) human and animal life saved by a man who built a large boat and took aboard it for the duration of the flood enough life to repopulate the Earth. [75] According to Genesis, two of every "unclean" kind of animal (male and female) and seven of every "clean" kind of animal were placed on the ark during the flood.
After the flood, Genesis reports the average human lifespan dropping quickly from an average of 900 years at the time of Noah to an average of 175 by the time of Abraham.  Some Young Earth creationists have suggested that this is due to effects associated with inbreeding that took place after the flood, as only eight people remained. [76] Another hypothesis suggests that the Earth had a higher concentration of oxygen prior to the flood, possibly due to a layer of water vapor ("vapor canopy") above the Earth.  The result of such a postulation would be a giant hyperbaric chamber, extending lifespans.  Others hypothesize that the ‘firmament’ of the ‘waters above’ screened the Earth from harmful ultraviolet rays, which they argue, shorten life expectancy.

The Ostrich Approach
When the various scientific theories began to gain authority, the religious crowd needed to adjust their beliefs in order to ensure being taken serious.  Hence, the ‘head in the sand’ approach (pictured below [6]).  Genesis 1 is ‘only’ a myth and should not be taken seriously and certainly not literally. 
Internal criticism
When God deployed His Law into Israel, He argued His authority by identifying Himself as the one who created the heavens and the earth in six days (Exodus 20:1 & 11).  If that is a myth, God and His Law are myths and Jesus, who fulfilled the Law, is also a myth.  It is impossible to maintain that the creation account is a myth, and the rest is true.  The Bible is either entirely true or entirely false.  Jesus once said that we should be either hot or cold—stand where we stand, believe what we truly believe—but not lukewarm.
External criticism
If Genesis 1 is an untrue representation of our origin, why was it preserved?  Think of the flat-earth hypothesis, the solar-central model, alchemy, bloodletting, the steady state model, and superstring theory... all abandoned myths which science debunked.  Now science has revealed that the universe did not come about in six days, and is far from 6000 years old.  Still, Genesis 1 is part of the most loved and most revered documents man has.  Why has it not been abandoned like all the other folly myths?
Lincoln once said, “You can fool all people once, and some people all the time.  But you cannot fool all the people all the time”.  No explaining or coercing can make anything that important; the love of Genesis must have come from within, a natural, fundamental kinship of mankind over many centuries with a story that no one understood.
Not a myth.  Just something else. 
The Gap Theory
Made famous by Hal Lindsey , the Gap creationism idea demands that between Genesis 1:1 and 1:2 a gap in the narrative exists.  The word translated with ‘was’ (the earth was void and formless) may also mean ‘became’ (the earth became void and formless).  It is then believed that God created the heavens and the earth in a perfect state but that the angelic insurrection which identified Lucifer as Satan, wrecked it all.  Satan was thrown to earth (Revelation 12:4 & 9) and hence it became void and formless.
Internal criticism
Scriptures link earth’s decay to the fall of man (Genesis 3) and the work of Christ consists of the salvation of the sons of Adam that still suffer his fall.  If the gap-theory is anywhere near true, there must have been some kind of restoration after the fall of Satan in order to produce Paradise.  The Bible does not speak of any such proceedings, nor does it present the cosmic situation to consist of two distinct fallings.  Rather, the fall of Satan and the fall of man are considered the same event.  Satan revolted and dragged man with him, all described in Genesis 3.  Before the fall, things were perfect.  The tree of knowledge of good and evil was perfect, Lucifer before he became Satan was perfect, and mankind was perfect.  The gap-theory leaves God to be a clumsy creator and a lousy manager.  Didn't He know His own rule that anything that can go wrong must go wrong?  Create an unstable situation and let it run indefinitely will certainly cause trouble.
External criticism
“Where’s the beef?”  There's not a whiff of beef to the gap-theory; it does not explain anything, is not congruent with either scientific records or Scriptural revelations and is a myth at most. 
Progressive creationism 
Progressive creationism is the religious belief that God created new forms of life gradually, over a period of hundreds of millions of years.  As a form of Old Earth creationism, it accepts mainstream geological and cosmological estimates for the age of the Earth, but posits that the new ‘kinds’ of plants and animals that have appeared successively over the planet's history represent instances of God directly intervening to create those new types by means outside the realm of science.  Progressive creationists generally reject macroevolution because they believe it to be biologically untenable and not supported by the fossil record, and they generally reject the concept of universal descent from a last universal ancestor.
Progressive creationist and astrophysicist Hugh Ross adheres to a literal translation of Genesis 1 and 2 and holds to the principle that ‘Scripture interprets Scripture’ to shed light on the context of the Creation account. [77] Using this principle, Progressive creationist Alan Hayward cites Hebrews 4, which discusses in the context of the creation story, a continued Seventh Day of creation. [78] Ross ties this literal view of a lengthy seventh day to the Creation account in which he describes the Hebrew word ‘yom’ to have multiple translation possibilities, ranging from 24 hours, year, time, age, or eternity. [77] Ross contends that at the end of each Genesis "day", with the exception of the Seventh ‘day’, the phrase, “…and there was evening and there was morning,” is used to put a terminus to each event. [77] The omission of that phrase on the Seventh Day, according to Ross, is in harmony with the literal translation of Hebrews 4’s continuing Seventh Day. [77]
Internal Criticism
From a theological perspective, Robert Newman addresses a problem with this particular model of lengthy Genesis days, in that it puts physical plant and animal death before the fall of man, which according to most Young Earth creationism is considered unscriptural. [79]  Old Earth creationists interpret death due to the fall of man as spiritual death specifically related to the context of man himself.  Another problem with The interpretation of the creation story continuing on the Seventh Day is that it seems to conflict with a literal translation of Genesis 2:2-3:
2 By the seventh day God completed His work which He had done, and He rested on the seventh day from all His work which He had done.  3 Then God blessed the seventh day and sanctified it, because in it He rested from all His work which God had created and made. [1] (NASB)
External Criticism
Progressive creationism is due to the complicated nature of a model that arises from an attempt not to favor science over Scripture and vice versa, potentially angering both schools of thought with this compromise. [80] Theological fence-walking is a word that comes to mind.  God seems to pick and choose arbitrarily when He will create a new life form.  Tomorrow we may get Klingons ! [6]
Intelligent design (ID)
Intelligent design is the proposition that “certain features of the universe and of living things are best explained by an intelligent cause, not an undirected process such as natural selection.” [81]  It seeks to redefine science in a fundamental way that would invoke supernatural explanations, a viewpoint known as theistic science.  It puts forward a number of arguments, the most prominent of which are irreducible complexity and specified complexity, in support of the existence of a designer. [82]
Internal Criticism
Where does Scripture come in to play?  Two of the most prominent Young Earth creationism organizations in the world have attempted to distinguish their views from intelligent design.  Henry M. Morris of the Institute for Creation Research (ICR) wrote, in 1999, that ID, “even if well-meaning and effectively articulated, will not work!  It has often been tried in the past and has failed, and it will fail today.  The reason it won't work is because it is not the Biblical method.”  According to Morris: “The evidence of intelligent design… must be either followed by or accompanied by a sound presentation of true Biblical creationism if it is to be meaningful and lasting.” [83]  In 2002, Carl Wieland of Answers in Genesis (AiG) criticized design advocates who, though well-intentioned, “left the Bible out of it” and thereby unwittingly aided and abetted the modern rejection of the Bible. [84]
External Criticism
Intelligent Design is an argument from ignorance because it relies on a lack of knowledge for its conclusion: lacking a natural explanation for certain specific aspects of creation and evolution, we assume intelligent cause.  The failure to follow the procedures of scientific discourse and the failure to submit work to the scientific community that withstands scrutiny have weighed against intelligent design being accepted as valid science. [85] Scott and Branch also contend that the supposedly novel contributions proposed by intelligent design proponents have not served as the basis for any productive scientific research. [86]
The Framework or Kingdom Theory
Probably the most favored theory among academics—including Henri A. G. Blocher, a French evangelical theologian— this idea organizes the six days in three groups of two.  It is said that God first created three kingdoms (space on day 1, water on day 2, and land on day 3) and then filled them with inhabitants (celestial bodies on day 4 to occupy the space of day 1, sea-dwellers on day 5 to occupy the waters of day 2, and land-dwellers on day 6 to occupy the land of day 3).
Internal criticism
Space (or the heavens) was certainly created on day 1, but so were earth and also the waters (because that is what God's Spirit hovered over).  On day 3, the earth is not created but made dry.  On day 2, the waters are separated, not created.  What is created on day 2 is the firmament that separates the waters.  This firmament is again called the heavens.  Moreover, on day 5 not only sea-dwellers are created but also birds that are to breed on earth.  The kingdom-theory consists of an organization that gravely distorts the story.  It is simply inconsistent.
External criticism
The kingdom theory demands that God created realms first and then filled them with inhabitants.  Nowhere in Scriptures is this done this way.  In fact, making kingdoms (for people) is done so often and always in the same way, from which a principle may be derived: the Voyager Principle.
The Voyager Principle: In the making of a kingdom, the people are always created first, they are always displaced in some form or other, go on a journey and then arrive at their rightful place of residence.
Examples of the Voyager phenomenon:
	God creates Adam outside the garden of Eden (2:7) then He places him there (2:8 & 15). 
	Abraham is called, and then brought to Canaan. 
	Jacob is called, and then brought to Canaan. 
	Israel emerges, then brought to Canaan. 
	Even the Body of Christ is made, and then brought to the New Jerusalem. 
The kingdom theory suggests that God started creation in a way that is opposite to the way it evolved.  Very unlikely.
And if that is not enough, the kingdom theory does not explain anything.  It does not explain why or how, it only suggests a structure that does not exist.  The only common ground the Kingdom Theory has with the creation account is that it is void and formless. 
The validity of any Creation Theory hinges on how it gets away with the six explicit days mentioned in the account.
 
Chapter 21.1 Creation Science
- Is it Science? -
 “Today most scientists would not deem their work to have any theological component whatsoever.  But even the stoutest atheist among them unwittingly retains the view that nature is rationally ordered and intelligible.  It wouldn't be possible to be a scientist without accepting the rational intelligibility of the universe as an act of faith.  And Faith is the right word.  Science cannot prove that nature has to be this way.  Yet many scientists assume that nature conforms to a design or scheme of some sort, even if they are coy about admitting it.  ....  The essence of scientific belief is that nature is neither arbitrary nor absurd, that there are valid reasons for the way things are.” [87] 
	Paul Davies
Creation Science or scientific creationism is a branch of creationism, which attempts to provide scientific support for the Genesis creation narrative in the Book of Genesis and disprove generally accepted scientific facts, theories and scientific paradigms about the history of the Earth, cosmology and biological evolution. [88] [89]  The main ideas in creation science are: (1) the belief in "creation ex nihilo"—the conviction that the Earth was created within the last ten thousand years; (2) the belief that mankind and other life on Earth were created as distinct fixed ‘baraminological’  kinds; and (3) the idea that fossils found in geological strata were deposited during a cataclysmic flood which completely covered the entire Earth.  As a result, creation science also challenges the geologic and astrophysical evidence for the age and origins of Earth and Universe, which creation scientists acknowledge are irreconcilable to the account in the Book of Genesis. [90]  Creation science proponents often refer to the theory of evolution as ‘Darwinism’ or as ‘Darwinian evolution’.  Proponents of creation science claim that it is a genuine scientific challenge to historical geology, the antiquity of the universe, and the theory of evolution. 
The scientific community states that Creation Science is a religious, not a scientific view, and that Creation science does not qualify as science because it lacks empirical support, supplies no tentative hypotheses, and resolves to describe natural history in terms of scientifically un-testable supernatural causes. [91] Creation science has been characterized as a pseudo-scientific attempt to map the Bible into scientific facts. [92]
The earliest creation science texts and curricula focused upon concepts derived from a literal interpretation of the Bible and were overtly religious in nature, most notably linking Noahic flood in the Biblical Genesis account to the geological and fossil record in a system termed "flood geology".  These works attracted little notice beyond the schools and congregations of conservative fundamental and evangelical Christians until the 1970s when its followers challenged the teaching of evolution in the public schools and other venues in the United States, bringing it to the attention of the public-at-large and the scientific community.  Many school boards and lawmakers were persuaded to include the teaching of creation science alongside Darwinian evolution in the science curriculum. [93]  Creation science texts and curricula used in churches and Christian schools were revised to eliminate their Biblical and theological references, and less explicitly sectarian versions of creation science education were introduced in public schools in Louisiana, Arkansas, and other regions in the United States. [93]
The 1982 ruling in McLean vs. Arkansas found that “creation science fails to meet the essential characteristics of science and that its chief intent is to advance a particular religious view.” [94]  The teaching of creation science in public schools in the United States effectively ended in 1987 following the United States Supreme Court decision in Edwards vs. Aguillard. [90]  The court affirmed that a statute requiring the teaching of creation science alongside evolution when evolution is taught in Louisiana public schools was unconstitutional because “its sole true purpose was to advance a particular religious belief.” [94]
Authors Criticism of Scientific Community and Court
There are two principles we need to go to revisit:
Principle (8b):
Since reality is fuzzy, accuracy is approximation.
Principle (9)
No logical system will ever be able to present fully the Truth about the Universe.
Principle (8b) is due to the difference between true randomness and mathematical Randomness or Pseudo-Randomness.  Of course, Principle (9) is Gödel’s ‘well known’ Incompleteness Theorem.  Surely, the court knew that!  Surely, scientists know that they can never conclusively present the truth of the Universe with any logical system!  Did I miss something here?  Creation science is not science because it cannot prove its point through a logical system—e.g., the scientific method—and cannot provide accurate empirical data to support its hypotheses.  However, ‘Science’ is science because it cannot prove its point through a logical system—e.g., the scientific method, which is incomplete—and cannot provide accurate empirical data to support its hypotheses—since accuracy is an approximation.  Oh, I get it.  There are different rules for Christian Science and Secular Science!  Maybe the court’s decision was not a legal view but anti-religious view!
The scientific method cannot be used to study the scientific method itself!  Gödel showed it by defining a true statement that is deduced from a formal axiomatic system, but it cannot be proven within it, or in other words, the axiomatic system itself is not a complete method when it is expressed by a formal system.  Here is the outline:
	We make a hypothesis that the scientific method cannot be used to study the scientific method.
	We create a test of the scientific method.  We could try a whole number of tests about the scientific method.  We can try, "The scientific method cannot prove this", instead of my last suggestion.
	We conclude that if the scientific method can prove that then it is contradictory and if it cannot prove that then it is incomplete.  So in this example, which perfectly illustrates Gödel, the conclusion is that this test does not prove that the scientific method cannot study itself but is incomplete to study itself.
Beliefs and activities
Religious basis
Creation science is based largely upon chapters 1-11 of the Book of Genesis.  These describe how God (Hebrew Elohim) calls the world into existence through the power of speech ("God said, 'Let there be light'," etc.) in six days, calls all the animals and plants into existence, and molds the first man from clay and the first woman from a rib taken from the man's side; a worldwide flood destroys all life except for Noah and his family and representatives of the animals, and Noah becomes the ancestor of the 70 ‘nations’ of the world; the nations live together and speak one language until the incident of the Tower of Babel, when God disperses them and gives them their different languages. Creation science rarely goes beyond these stories, but the bible also contains a complex internal chronology that places the initial act of creation some six thousand years ago, and creation science therefore frequently attempts to explain history and science within this timeframe.
Views on science
Creation science rejects evolution’s theory of the common descent of all living things on the Earth.  Instead, it asserts that the field of evolutionary biology is itself pseudoscientific [95] or even a religion.  Creation scientists argue instead for a system called baraminology, which considers the living world to be descended from uniquely created kinds or baramins. [96]  
Creation science incorporates the concept of catastrophism to account for Earth's geological formations.  Creation scientists employ the concept to attempt to reconcile current landforms and fossil distributions with Biblical interpretations, proposing the remains resulted from successive cataclysmic events, such as a worldwide flood and subsequent ice age.  It rejects one of the fundamental principles of modern geology (and of modern science generally): uniformitarianism, which means applying the same physical and geological laws observed on the Earth today to interpret the Earth’s geological history. [97]
Sometimes creation scientists attack other scientific concepts, like the Big Bang cosmological model or methods of scientific dating which measure radioactive decay.  The Young Earth creationist branch of the creation scientists also rejects current estimates of the age of the Universe and the age of the Earth, arguing for creationist cosmologies with timescales much shorter than those determined by modern physical cosmology and geological science, typically less than 10,000 years. 
One young earth creationist concept proposed by D. Russell Humphreys (right [6]),  called ‘white hole cosmology’, proposes that while the Earth has been in existence for only several thousand years, the universe has been in existence for billions of years even while God created them at the same time.  The difference in time frames is explained as being due to the effects of relativity within a short span of time on Earth after the Earth's creation.  This model places the Earth at or near the center of the Universe and inside a kind of white hole at the time it was created.  This idea has been endorsed by the Institute for Creation Research and Answers in Genesis, but has been criticized by the scientific community for: failing to explain why that white hole no longer exists; badly mangling the standard general relativity treatment of gravitational time dilation (which would require a black hole, not a white hole for time to pass more rapidly far away from the Earth). [98]
The scientific community has overwhelmingly rejected the ideas put forth in creation science as lying outside the boundaries of a legitimate science.  [91] [90]  The scientific community claims that the foundational premises underlying scientific creationism disqualify it as a science because the answers to all inquiry therein are preordained to conform to Bible doctrine, and because that inquiry is constructed upon theories that are not empirically testable in nature.  Yet, the scientific community does not appear to be alarmed that the premises underlying evolution is preordained to conform to evolution theories which are not constructed on theories which are empirically testable in nature. 
Scientists also deem creation science's attacks against biological evolution to be without scientific merit.  Those views of the scientific community were accepted in two significant court decisions in the 1980s that found the field of creation science to be a religious mode of inquiry, not a scientific one.
History
The teaching of evolution was gradually introduced into more and more public high school textbooks in the United States after 1900, [99] but in the aftermath of the First World War, the growth of fundamentalist Christianity gave rise to a creationist opposition to such teaching.  Legislation prohibiting the teaching of evolution was passed in certain regions, most notably Tennessee’s Butler Act of 1925. [100] The 1957 Soviet Union's successful space launch of Sputnik sparked national concern that the science education in public schools was outdated.  In 1958, the United States passed National Defense Education Act that introduced new education guidelines for science instruction.  With federal grant funding, the Biological Sciences Curriculum Study (BSCS) drafted new standards for the public schools' science textbooks that included the teaching of evolution.  Almost half the nation’s high schools were using textbooks based on the guidelines of the BSCS soon after they were published in 1963. [101]  The Tennessee legislature did not repeal the Butler Act until 1967. [89]
Creation science (dubbed ‘Scientific Creationism’ at the time) emerged as an organized movement during the 1960s.  It was strongly influenced by the earlier work of Canadian armchair geologist and Seventh-day Adventist George McCready Price (right [6]) who wrote works such as The New Geology to advance what he termed ‘new catastrophism’ and dispute the current geological periods and explanations of geologic history.  Price's work was cited at the Scopes Trial of 1925, yet although he frequently solicited feedback from geologists and other scientists, they consistently disparaged his work. [102] Price's ‘new catastrophism’ also went largely unnoticed by other creationists, until its revival with the 1961 publication of The Genesis Flood by Henry M. Morris and John C. Whitcomb [103], a work which quickly became an important text on the issue to fundamentalist Christians [90].  This expanded the field of creation science beyond critiques of geology into biology and cosmology as well.  Soon after its publication, a movement was underway to have the subject taught in United States' public schools. 
Intelligent Design splits off
In 1984, The Mystery of Life's Origin [104] was first published.  It was co-authored by chemist and creationist Charles B. Thaxton with Walter L. Bradley and Roger L. Olsen, the foreword written by Dean H. Kenyon, and sponsored by the Christian based Foundation for Thought and Ethics (FTE).  The work presented scientific arguments against current theories of abiogenesis and offered a hypothesis of special creation instead.  While the focus of creation science had until that time centered primarily on the criticism of the fossil record for evolution and validation of the creation myth of the Bible, this new work posed the question whether science reveals that even the simplest living systems were far too complex to have developed by natural, unguided processes. [89]
Kenyon (left [6]) later co-wrote with creationist Percival Davis a book intended as a “scientific brief for creationism" [105] to use as a supplement to public high school biology textbooks.  Thaxton was enlisted as the book's editor, and the book received publishing support from the FTE.  Prior to its release, the 1987 Supreme Court ruling in Edwards v. Aguillard barred the teaching of creation science and creationism in public school classrooms.  The book, originally titled Biology and Creation but renamed Of Pandas and People [106], was released in 1989 and became the first published work to promote the anti-evolutionist design argument under the name intelligent design.  The contents of the book later became a focus of evidence in the federal court case, Kitzmiller v. Dover Area School District, when parents filed suit to halt the teaching of intelligent design in Dover, Pennsylvania public schools.  School board officials there had attempted to include Of Pandas and People in their biology classrooms and testimony given during the trial revealed the book was originally written as a creationist text but following the adverse decision in the Supreme court it underwent simple cosmetic editing to remove the explicit allusions to ‘creation’ or ‘creator’, and replace them instead with references to ‘design’ or ‘designer’. [89]
By the mid 1990s, Intelligent Design (ID) had become a separate movement. [89] The creation science movement is distinguished from the intelligent design movement, or neo-creationism, because most advocates of creation science accept scripture as a literal and inerrant historical account, and their primary goal is to corroborate the Scriptural account with science.  In contrast, as a matter of principle, neo-creationism avoids references to scripture altogether in its polemics and stated goals.  By so doing, intelligent design proponents have attempted to succeed where creation science has failed in securing a place in public school science curricula.  Carefully avoiding any reference to the identity of the intelligent designer as God in their public arguments, intelligent design proponents sought to reintroduce the creationist ideas into science classrooms while sidestepping the First Amendment's prohibition against religious infringement. [89] However, the ID curriculum was struck down as a violation of the Establishment Clause in Kitzmiller v. Dover Area School District, the judge in the case ruling "that ID is nothing less than the progeny of creationism". [107]
Today, Creation Science as an organized movement is primarily centered within the United States.  However, creation science organizations are known in other countries, most notably Creation Ministries International, which was founded (under the name Creation Science Foundation) in Australia.  Proponents are usually aligned with a Christian denomination, primarily with those characterized as evangelical, conservative, or fundamentalist.  While creationist movements also exist in Islam and Judaism, these movements do not use the phrase creation science to describe their beliefs.
Creation biology
Creation biology centers on an idea derived from Genesis 1 that states that life was created by God, in a finite number of ‘created kinds’, rather than through biological evolution from a common ancestor.  Creation scientists consider that any observable speciation  descends from these distinctly created kinds through inbreeding, deleterious mutations and other genetic mechanisms. [108] Whereas evolutionary biologists and creation scientists share similar views of microevolution, creation scientists disagree that the process of macroevolution can explain common ancestry among organisms far beyond the level of common species. [101] Creationists contend that there is no empirical evidence for new plant or animal species, and deny fossil evidence has ever been found documenting the process. [109]
Flood geology
Flood geology is a concept based on the belief that the Great Flood described in the story oh Noah's ark formed most of the Earth's geological record.  Fossils and fossil fuels are believed to have formed from animal and plant matter that was buried rapidly during this flood, while submarine canyons are explained as having formed during a rapid runoff from the continents at the end of the flood.  Sedimentary strata are also claimed to have been predominantly laid down during or after Noahic flood [110] and orogeny .  [111] Flood geology is a variant of catastrophism and is contrasted with geological science in that it rejects standard geological principles such as uniformitarianism and radiometric dating.  For example, the Creation Research Society argues that "uniformitarianism is wishful thinking." [111]
Radiometric dating
Radiometric dating (often called radioactive dating) is a technique used to date materials such as rocks, usually based on a comparison between the observed abundance of a naturally occurring radioactive isotope and its decay products, using known decay rates.  It is the principal source of information about the absolute age of rocks and other geological features, including the age of the Earth itself, and can be used to date a wide range of natural and man-made materials.  Together with stratigraphic  principles, radiometric dating methods are used in geochronology  to establish the geological time scale.  Among the best-known techniques are radiocarbon dating, potassium-argon dating and uranium-lead dating.  By allowing the establishment of geological timescales, it provides a significant source of information about the ages of fossils and the deduced rates of evolutionary change.  Radiometric dating is also used to date archaeological materials, including ancient artifacts.  Different methods of radiometric dating vary in the timescale over which they are accurate and the materials to which they can be applied.
The precision of a dating method depends in part on the half-life of the radioactive isotope involved.  For instance, carbon-14 has a half-life of 5,730 years.  After an organism has been dead for 60,000 years so little carbon-14 is left that accurate dating cannot be established.  On the other hand, the concentration of carbon-14 falls off so steeply that the age of relatively young remains can be determined precisely to within a few decades. [112]
While the moment in time at which a particular nucleus decays is unpredictable, a collection of atoms of a radioactive nuclide decays exponentially at a rate described by a parameter known as the half-life, usually given in units of years when discussing dating techniques.  After one half-life has elapsed, one-half of the atoms of the nuclide in question will have decayed into a ‘daughter’ nuclide or decay product.  In many cases, the daughter nuclide itself is radioactive, resulting in a decay chain, eventually ending with the formation of a stable (nonradioactive) daughter nuclide; each step in such a chain is characterized by a distinct half-life.
The validity of radiometric dating depends upon the three assumptions being correct: (1) the decay rate is a constant is (questionable); (2) the parent/daughter ratio when the object being tested was ‘created’ is known (doubtful); and the assumption that there has been no loss or addition of the parent or daughter component throughout its history (doubtful).  Scientists, of course, try to correct for these flaws through techniques such as carefully choosing the samples, dating multiple samples, etc.  However, there are many cited cases of inconsistent dating results where the obtained date was very different from the expected date based on the position of the rock in the geologic column, and results where lava flow rocks of a known recent age were dated to millions of years old (such as at Grand Canyon, as documented by ICR scientists).  Also, see Woodmorappe, Studies in Flood Geology [113], where over 300 major inconsistencies are documented.  There is also the issue of ‘selective publication’, where the reported dates will always tend to be those that fall into the "already known to be approximately correct" range, while other samples giving the "wrong date" "must be bad". [114] 
Creationists point to experiments they have performed, which demonstrate that 1.5 billion years of nuclear decay took place over a short period of time, from which they infer that "billion-fold speed-ups of nuclear decay" have occurred—a violation of the principle that radioisotope decay rates are constant, a core principle underlying nuclear physics generally, and radiometric dating in particular. [110]
Creationists have also advanced theories that may explain why rock samples appear to have old ages, and question the validity of the ‘isochron’ dating procedure, which uses multiple samples.  The bottom line is that radiometric dating procedures do not provide the consistent absolute dating method we would like to have. 
Creationist cosmologies
Several attempts have been made by creationists to construct a cosmology consistent with a young universe rather than the standard cosmological age of the universe, based on the belief that Genesis describes the creation of the universe as well as the Earth.  The primary challenge for young-universe cosmologies is that the accepted distances in the universe require millions or billions of years for light to travel to Earth (the starlight problem).  To this I remind the reader that the ‘starlight problem’ is based on the two-way speed of light that scientist can accurately measure.  Again, due to Einstein’s Theory of Relativity, the one-way speed of light may be instantaneous and account for the discrepancy that scientist point.  Moreover, due to Heisenberg’s Uncertainty Principle, the one-way speed of light cannot be measured.
An older creationist idea, proposed by creationist astronomer Barry Satterfield, is that the speed of light has decayed in the history of the universe. [115]  More recently, creationist physicist Russell Humphreys has proposed a theory called ‘white hole cosmology’, which suggests that the universe expanded out of a white hole less than 10,000 years ago; the apparent age of the universe results from relativistic effects. [116] Humphreys’ theory is advocated by creationist organizations such as Answers in Genesis; however because the predictions of Humphreys’ cosmology conflict with so-called ‘well-established’ observations, it is not accepted by the scientific community.  [108]
 
The yom problem
- Yom: Biggest Biblical Creation Theory Obstacle -
The word yom
The Hebrew word for day is ‘yom’ and this word appears in Scriptures over 1400 times.  And without exception this word, when written in the singular sense, means day.  And that's it.  Never anything else.  Eons are indicated with the plural form: days, as in the days of such and such.  The most popular counter argument is that the meaning of our word is fiercely restricted to ‘day’ for about a thousand times in the sequential Scriptures, but in the secluded chapter of Genesis 1 means something completely different!  But honestly, if in Genesis 1 our word should have meant ‘long time’ it would have said ‘long time’.  There are available Hebrew words that mean just that.  None of which occur in Genesis 1. 
The word as used in Genesis 1 means day and day alone.  There is no way around it, and every serious theory to make (systematic, not theological) sense out of Genesis 1 should first and foremost address the yom-problem.
The solution lies in the rule we have established four chapters ago:
Principle (11)
In Hebrew Scriptures, and all models derived thereof, entities are reckoned solely after their behavior and not after their appearance.
An entity is a behavior, not that which executes the behavior.
To define something, the Hebrew language does not look at outer parameters but always at the action that needs to be named.  The time-length of a yom is an outer parameter and not regarded in Hebrew.  Since time and space are the four dimensions of space-time, and we measure sizes in the spacial dimensions with a ruler, a clock is a ruler for time.  An hour is a ‘distance’ just like a mile.
A yom is not defined as something that is necessarily 24 hours long, but something that executes the action that defines a yom.  Strictly spoken, a yom does not even have to have a length, as long as it executes the typical behavior that defines it.  Forcing a static 24-hour mold upon the word yom may not be the intent of the language of Genesis 1.
A yom therefore is a phase of a continuum (whether space-time, complexity or something else) that consists of two periods: a ‘dark’ part and a ‘light’ part.  During the dark part of a regular day people sleep and are disconnected.  During the light part, they communicate and work together.  Any other manifestation of yom should display the same kind of darkness (elements not connected) and lightness (elements connected).
Hebrew
(action) 	Western
(appearance) 
 
horse = swallow = swift
 	 
horse = cow = between 1 & 2 meters high; 4 legs
 
cow ≠ horse ≠ swallow
 	 
swallow = 25 cm long; 2 legs, 2 wings
≠ horse or cow 

 
yom = a phase of a continuum that consists of two periods; dark and light.  During the dark part the elements are not connected.  During the light part the elements are connected.  	Wednesday March 2, 2011 10:08 
 
12 hours from now: 22:08 
24 hours from now:
Thursday March 3 2011 10:08 

day = 24 hours long 
Back to the Jewish Calendar
There you have it—a yom is a day in Genesis!  Although yom in Genesis 1 may not be a 24-hour period in the strictest of sense, the context of the Hebrew (Jewish) Calendar handed down by tradition—and formalized by the Sanhedrin president Hillel II in approximately C.E. 359—is perhaps the ‘king of context’ in this instance.  Moses passed along the creation story, the flood story, and the laws about observances on certain Jewish civil day, weeks, months, years; it seems obvious that Moses was speaking about civil days and at most civil years, not thousands or millions of them.  And this was handed down by tradition until the writing of the Pentateuch (containing Genesis, Exodus, Leviticus, Numbers, and Deuteronomy) was recorded. 
Moses got the creation story directly from the Creator on Mount Sinai, along with the ten commandments and the law (Deut. 4:1-15, 32), and the story, commands and laws were passed orally (Deut. 4:5, 13, 32; Deut. 6:4-9).  It was not until just before Joshua took the people across the Jordan into the promised land that these were written down in the Book of Law : “This Book of the Law shall not depart from your mouth, but you shall meditate in it day and night, that you may observe to do according to all that is written in it.” [1]  (Joshua 1:8; context 5-9)
Structure
The Jewish calendar is a lunisolar calendar, or fixed lunar year, based on twelve lunar months of twenty-nine or thirty days, with an intercalary lunar month added seven times every nineteen years (once every two to three years) to synchronize the twelve lunar cycles with the slightly longer solar year.  Each Jewish lunar month starts with the new moon.  Although originally the new lunar crescent had to be observed and certified by witnesses, the timing of the new moon is now determined mathematically.
Concurrently, there is a weekly cycle of seven days, mirroring the seven-day period of the Book of Genesis in which the world is created.  The names for the days of the week, like those in the Creation story, are simply the day number within the week, with Shabbat being the seventh day.  The Jewish day always runs from sunset to the next sunset; the formal adjustments used to specify a standard time and time zones are not relevant to the Jewish calendar.
The twelve regular months are: Nisan (30 days), Iyar (29 days), Sivan (30 days), Tammuz (29 days), Av (30 days), Elul (29 days), Tishrei (30 days), Marcheshvan (29 or 30 days), Kislev (29 or 30 days), Tevet (29 days), Shevat (30 days), and Adar (29 days).  In the leap years (such as 5771) an additional month, Adar I (30 days) is added after Shevat, and the regular Adar is referred to as ‘Adar II’.
The first month of the festival year is Nisan.  15 Nisan is the start of the festival of Pesach, corresponding to the full moon of Nisan.  Pesach is a spring festival associated with the barley harvest, [117] so the leap-month mentioned above is intercalated periodically to keep this festival in the northern hemisphere's spring season.  Since the adoption of a fixed calendar, intercalations in the Hebrew calendar have been at fixed points in a 19-year cycle.  Prior to this, the intercalation was determined empirically:
The year may be intercalated on three grounds: 'aviv (i.e. the ripeness of barley), fruits of trees, and the equinox.  On two of these grounds, it should be intercalated, but not on one of them alone. [118] 
The Bible designates Nisan, which it calls Aviv (Exodus 13:4), as the first month of the year (Exodus 12:2).  At the same time, the season of the fall Festival of Booths (Sukkoth), is called “the end of the year” (Exodus 23:16).  The Sabbatical year in which the land was to lie fallow, necessarily began at the time the winter barley and winter wheat would have been sown, in the fall.  The Gezer calendar, an Israelite or Canaanite inscription c. 900 BCE, also begins in the fall. [119] 
Modern practice follows the scheme described in the Mishnah : Rosh Hashanah, which means “the head of the year”, and is celebrated in the month of Tishrei, is "the new year for years." [120] This is when the numbered year changes and most Jews today view Tishrei as the de facto beginning of the year.
Sources and history
The Tanakh  contains several commandments related to the keeping of the calendar and the lunar cycle, and records changes that have taken place to the Hebrew calendar.
Day
The Jewish day is of no fixed length.  The Jewish day is modeled on the reference to “...there was evening and there was morning...”  in the Creation story.  Accordingly, it runs from sunset (start of ‘the evening’) to the next sunset.  However, some apply special rules at very high latitudes when the sun remains above or below the horizon for longer than a civil day.  However, even in Alaska, days do not last a thousand years—though it may seem so if you are in Alaska.
There is no clock in the Jewish scheme, so that a civil clock is used.  Though the civil clock incorporates local adoptions of various conventions such as time zones, standard times and daylight saving, these have no place in the Jewish scheme.  The civil clock is used only as a reference point - in expressions such as: “Shabbat starts at ...”.  The steady progression of sunset around the world and seasonal changes results in gradual civil time changes from one day to the next based on observable astronomical phenomena (the sunset) and not on man-made laws and conventions.
Instead of the international date line convention, there are varying opinions as to where the day changes.  One opinion uses the antemeridian of Jerusalem.  (Jerusalem is 35°13’ east of the prime meridian, so the antemeridian is at 144°47' W, passing through eastern Alaska.)  Other opinions exist as well.
Weeks
The Hebrew calendar follows a seven-day weekly cycle, which runs concurrently but independently of the monthly and annual cycles.  The names for the days of the week are simply the day number within the week.  In Hebrew, these names may be abbreviated using the numerical value of the Hebrew letters, for example יום א׳ (Day 1, or Yom Rishon (יום ראשון)):
	Yom Rishon - יום ראשון (abbreviated יום א׳) = ‘first day’ = Sunday (starting at preceding sunset)
	Yom Sheni - יום שני (abbr. יום ב׳) = ‘second day’ = Monday
	Yom Shlishi - יום שלישי (abbr. יום ג׳) = ‘third day’ = Tuesday
	Yom Reviʻi - יום רבעי (abbr. יום ד׳) = ‘fourth day’ = Wednesday
	Yom Chamishi - יום חמישי (abbr. יום ה׳) = ‘fifth day’ = Thursday
	Yom Shishi - יום ששי (abbr. יום ו׳) = ‘sixth day’ = Friday
	Yom Shabbat - יום שבת (abbr. יום ש׳) or more usually שבת - Shabbat = ‘Sabbath day (Rest day)’ = Saturday
 The names of the days of the week are modeled on the seven days mentioned in the Creation story.  For example, Genesis 1:5 "...  And there was evening and there was morning, one day".  One day also translates to first day or day one.  Similarly, see Genesis 1:8, 1:13, 1:19, 1:23, 1:31 and 2.2.
The Jewish Shabbat has a special role in the Jewish weekly cycle.  There are many special rules that relate to the Shabbat, discussed more fully in the Talmudic tractate Shabbat.
In Hebrew, the word Shabbat (שַׁבָּת) can also mean ‘(Talmudic) week’,  so that in ritual liturgy a phrase likes "Yom Reviʻi bəShabbat" means "the fourth day in the week" .
Importance of lunar months
From very early times, the Mesopotamian lunisolar calendar was in wide use by the countries of the western Asia region.  The structure, which was also used by the Israelites, was based on lunar months with the intercalation of an additional month to bring the cycle closer to the solar cycle. [121] 
Num. 10:10 stresses the importance in Israelite religious observance of the new month (Hebrew:  ראש חודש, Rosh Chodesh, "beginning of the month"): "... in your new moons, ye shall blow with the trumpets over your burnt-offerings..."  Similarly in Num. 28:11.  "The beginning of the month" meant the appearance of a new moon.  In prophet Amos, the new moon seems to be described simply as Kadosh.
According to the Mishnah and Tosefta , in the Maccabean, Herodian, and Mishnaic periods, new months were determined by the sighting of a new crescent, with two eyewitnesses required to testify to the Sanhedrin to having seen the new lunar crescent at sunset. [120] The practice in the time of Gamaliel II  (c. 100 CE) was for witnesses to select the appearance of the moon from a collection of drawings that depicted the crescent in a variety of orientations, only a few of which could be valid in any given month. [120] These observations were compared against calculations. [120] When thirty days elapsed since the last new moon, the witnesses were readily believed. 
At first, the beginning of each Jewish month was signaled to the communities of Israel and beyond by fires lit on mountaintops, but after the Samaritans began to light false fires, messengers were sent. [120] The inability of the messengers to reach communities outside Israel before mid-month High Holy Days (Succot and Passover) led outlying communities to celebrate scriptural festivals for two days rather than one, observing the second feast-day of the Jewish diaspora because of uncertainty of whether the previous month ended after 29 or 30 days. 
 
In his work Mishneh Torah (1178), Maimonides  (left [6]) included a chapter "Sanctification of the New Moon", in which he discusses the calendrical rules and their scriptural basis.  He notes, 
“By how much does the solar year exceed the lunar year?  By approximately 11 days.  Therefore, whenever this excess accumulates to about 30 days, or a little more or less, one month is added and the particular year is made to consist of 13 months, and this is the so-called embolismic (intercalated) year.  For the year could not consist of twelve months plus so-and-so many days, since it is said: throughout the months of the year (Num. 28:14), which implies that we should count the year by months and not by days.” [122] 
Names of months
Biblical references to the pre-Jewish calendar include ten months identified by number rather than by name.  In parts of the Torah portion Noach (Noah) (specifically, Gen 7:11, Gen 8:4-5, Gen 8:13-14) it is implied that the months are thirty days long.  There is also indication that there were twelve months in the annual cycle (1Kin 4:7, 1Chr 27:1-15).
Many countries in the western Asian region used the Mesopotamian calendar from very early times, though the names of months varied. [121] Prior to the Babylonian exile, the names of only four months are referred to in the Tanakh:
	Aviv - first month - literally ‘spring’, which originally probably meant "the ripening of barley" (Exodus 12:2, 13:4, 23:15, 34:18, Deut. 16:1);
	Ziv - second month - literally ‘light’ (1 Kings 6:1, 6:37);
	Ethanim - seventh month - literally ‘strong’ in plural, perhaps referring to strong rains (1 Kings 8:2); and
	Bul - eighth month (1 Kings 6:38).
All of these are believed to be Canaanite names, and at least two are Phoenician (Northern Canaanite).
During the Babylonian exile, which started in 586 BCE, Babylonian month names were adopted, which are still in use. [121]  The Syrian calendar used in the Levant region shares many of the names for months as the Hebrew calendar, such as Nisan, Iyyar, Tammuz, Ab, Elul, Tishri, and Adar, indicating a common Babylonian origin.
Hebrew names and Romanized transliteration may somewhat differ, as they do for חשוון / Marheshvan or כסלו / Kislev: the Hebrew words shown here are those commonly indicated e.g. in newspapers.
In a regular (kesidran) year, Marcheshvan has 29 days and Kislev has 30 days.  However, because of the Rosh Hashanah postponement rules (see below) Kislev may lose a day to have 29 days, and the year is called a short (chaser) year, or Marcheshvan may acquire an additional day to have 30 days, and the year is called a full (maleh) year.  The calendar rules have been designed to ensure that Rosh Hashanah does not fall on a Sunday, Wednesday or Friday.  This is to ensure that Yom Kippur does not directly precede or follow Shabbat, which would create practical difficulties, and that Hoshana Rabbah is not on a Shabbat, in which case certain ceremonies would be lost for a year.
 
Hebrew names of the months with their Babylonian analogs
#	Hebrew	Academy	Length	Holidays/
Notable days	Notes
1	נִיסָן	Nisan
30 days	Passover
Called Abib (Exodus 13:4, 23:15, 34:18, Deut. 16:1)
and Nisan (Esther 3:7) in the Tanakh.

2	אִיָּר / אייר	Iyyar	29 days	Pesach Sheni
Lag B'Omer	Called Ziv in 1 Kings 6:1, 6:37.
3	סִיוָן / סיוון	Siwan	30 days	Shavuot	
4	תַּמּוּז	Tammuz	29 days	Seventeenth of Tammuz	
5	אָב	Av	30 days	Tisha B'Av
Tu B'Av	
6	אֱלוּל	Elul	29 days		
7	תִּשׁרִי	Tishri	30 days	Rosh Hashanah
Yom Kippur
Sukkot
Shmini Atzeret
Simchat Torah	Called Ethanim in 1 Kings 8:2.
First month of civil year.
8	מַרְחֶשְׁוָן / מרחשוון	Marẖeshwan	29 or
30 days		Called Bul in 1 Kings 6:38.
9	כִּסְלֵו / כסלוו	Kislew	29 or
30 days	Hanukkah	
10	טֵבֵת	Tebeth	29 days	Tenth of Tevet	
11	שְׁבָט	Shevat	30 days	Tu Bishvat	
12L*	אֲדָר א׳	Adar I*	30 days		*Only in Leap years.
12	אֲדָר / אֲדָר ב׳	Adar / Adar II*	29 days	Purim	

 
Leap months
The solar year is about eleven days longer than twelve lunar months.  The Bible does not directly mention the addition of ‘embolismic’ or intercalary months.  However, without the insertion of embolismic months, Jewish festivals would gradually shift outside of the seasons required by the Torah.  This has been ruled as implying a requirement for the insertion of embolismic months to reconcile the lunar cycles to the seasons, which are integral to solar yearly cycles.
When the observational form of the calendar was in use, whether or not an embolismic month was announced after the ‘last month’ (Adar) depended on whether ‘the barley was ripe’.  It may be noted that in the Bible the name of the first month, Aviv, literally means ‘spring’ but originally it probably meant, ‘the ripening of barley’.  Thus, if Adar was over and the barley was not yet ripe, an additional month was observed.  However, according to some traditions, the announcement of the month of Aviv could also be postponed depending on the condition of roads used by families to come to Jerusalem for Passover, adequate numbers of lambs to be sacrificed at the Temple, and on the ripeness of the barley that was needed for the first fruits ceremony.
Under the codified rules, the Jewish calendar is based on the Metonic cycle of 19 years, of which 12 are common years (12 months) and 7 leap years (13 months).  The leap years are years 3, 6, 8, 11, 14, 17, and 19 of the Metonic cycle.  Year 19 (there is no year 0) of the Metonic cycle is a year exactly divisible by 19 (when the Jewish year number, when divided by 19, has no remainder).  In the same manner, the remainder of the division indicates the year in which the Metonic cycle (years 1 to 18) falls.
During leap years Adar I (or Adar Aleph — ‘first Adar’) is added before the regular Adar.  Adar I is actually considered the extra month, and has 30 days.  Adar II (or Adar Bet — ‘second Adar’) is the ‘real’ Adar, and has the usual 29 days.  For this reason, holidays such as Purim are observed in Adar II, not Adar I.
Word Study On Yom 
(See also Neyman [123])
 
Keywords
yom
Day; as in our modern language, the word yom denotes both the entire cycle of one day and the light segment of it.  Many wonder if in the Bible a day consists of a dark part first and then the light, or vice versa.  But that is typical calendar-thinking.  Look at waves on the ocean.  Does the wave-peak precede the wave-trough or vice versa?
Activities were conducted on the light part of the day, but in case of special days (Sabbath and feasts), the jurisdiction of rules and regulations pertaining to that day commenced at the closure of the previous light part.
The Enhances Strong’s Lexicon [2] provides the following (where 3117 is the Strong’s number) omitting the symbols:
3117. From an unused root meaning to be hot; TWOT 852; GK 3427 and 3428; 2274 occurrences; AV translates as ‘day’ 2008 times, ‘time’ 64 times, ‘chronicles + 1697’ 37 times, ‘daily’ 32 times, ‘ever’ 17 times, ‘year’ 14 times, ‘continually’ 10 times, ‘when’ 10 times, ‘as’ 10 times, ‘while’ eight times, ‘full 8 always’ four times, ‘whole’ four times, ‘always’ four times, and translated miscellaneously 44 times.  1 day, time, year.  ( 1a) day (as opposed to night).  (1b) day (24 hour period).  (1b1) as defined by evening and morning in Genesis 1.  (1b2) as a division of time.  (1b2a) a working day, a day’s journey.  (1c) days, lifetime (pl.).  (1d) time, period (general).  (1e) year.  (1f) temporal references.  (1f1) today.  (1f2) yesterday.  (1f3) tomorrow.
The Complete Word Study Dictionary: Old Testament [124] states:
A masculine noun meaning day, time, year.  This word stands as the most basic conception of time in the Old Testament.  It designates such wide-ranging elements as the daylight hours from sunrise to sunset (Gen. 1:5; 1 Kgs. 19:4); a literal twenty-four hour cycle (Deut. 16:8; 2 Kgs. 25:30); a generic span of time (Gen. 26:8; Num. 20:15); a given point in time (Gen. 2:17; 47:29; Ezek. 33:12).  In the plural, the word may also mean the span of life (Ps. 102:3 [4]) or a year (Lev. 25:29; 1 Sam 27:7).  The prophets often infuse the word with end–times meanings or connotations, using it in connection with a future period of consequential events, such as the ‘day of the Lord’ (Jer. 46:10; Zech. 14:1) or simply, “that day” (Isa. 19:23; Zech. 14:20, 21).
The Theological Wordbook of the Old Testament states [125] :
“It can denote: (1) the period of light (as contrasted with the period of darkness),(2) the period of twenty-four hours, (3) a general vague ‘time,’ (4) a point of time, (5) a year (in the plural; I Sam 27:7; Ex 13:10, etc.).”
lylh 
Night; period of darkness. 
ur 
Light; applied to the full array of electromagnetic functions, as well as instructions, wisdom, grace, blessing, etc.  Light brings people together.  Since the self-similar applications of the word ur (blessing, grace, etc.) may stretch for any length of period, the corresponding yom does so too.  [124] [2]
hoshek 
Darkness; absence of light, not the absence of God.  This word is most often used to indicate curse or judgment, even to describe the darkness of the grave.  Lack of light causes people to break apart.  (The Second Law of thermo-dynamics dictates that in a system to which no energy (=light) is added the degree of chaos must increase).  Baker indicts that, “In its first occurrence, it is associated with disorder (Gen. 1:2)….” [124] However, as we have learned from Chaos Theory, what occurs to Baker as disorder may appear to God as perfect symmetry. [2] [124] [125]
boqer 
Morning.  From the verb baqar, meaning to seek/ inquire.  It is suggested that the most rudimental meaning of the root is ‘to split’, hence the breaking of dawn.  But frankly, nothing is broken.  Instead, the root seems to denote the closing in on something, approaching something (to check it out or to simply bond).  Another derivation of this root is ‘herd’, which is a collection of animals that are loosely bonded.  Morning is the time of day when objects become visible and begin to relate, and people begin to connect.  [2] [124] [125]
ereb 
Evening.  Derivation ma'arab is contrasted by mizrah where zarah means ‘to rise’.  Mizrah means ‘place of rising, or the east’.  Ma'arab means ‘place of setting, or the west’.  Hence, the root ereb denotes a going down, as opposed to the 'rising' of the word dawn.  In the evening, all things begin to dissolve against the backdrop of the night.  [2] [126] [125] 
shahar 
Dawn.  Comes from a verb meaning both ‘be black’ and ‘seek earnestly’.  Black and white are both dark but black is the color of receptivity for light, while white is the color of light-rejection.  As with the word for ‘morning’, the word shahar denotes the quest for relationship.  Most often, this word is used in concert with the verb ala, to rise.  In Hebrew, dawn does not break but rise.  [2] [124] [125] 
neshep 
Twilight (both in the evening as in the morning).  From the verb nashap, ‘to blow’: “But He merely blows on them and they whither” - Isa 40:24.  "You blew with your wind, the sea covered them” - Ex 15:10. [1] [124] [2] [125]
How long is a Genesis 1 Yom?
I think it is clear the context that a yom in Genesis one is a literal day—Jewish Day—and it runs from sunset (start of ‘the evening’) to the next sunset.  Although the length of days may vary by minutes, they certainly did nit vary by hundreds of hears.
There are suggestions by other authors that yom in Genesis 1:5 is not a 24-hour or Civil day, and may be as long as thousands of years, attempting to reconcile Genesis 1 to the fossil record.  What I attempt to do is reconcile the fossil record to Genesis 1—faith comes before science.  Moreover, the Bible is complete (see box) and coherent and science is not!
 
Is the Word of God Complete?
Yes, but you decide for yourselves.
1 "Now, O Israel, listen to the statutes and the judgments which I am teaching you to perform, so that you may live and go in and take possession of the land which the LORD, the God of your fathers, is giving you.  2 " You shall not add to the word which I am commanding you, nor take away from it, that you may keep the commandments of the LORD your God which I command you.  – Deuteronomy 4:1-2 (KJV)
He who rejects Me and does not receive My sayings, has one who judges him, the word I spoke is what will judge him at the last day.  - John 12:48 (KJV)
"These things I have spoken to you while abiding with you.  26 But the Helper, the Holy Spirit, whom the Father will send in My name, He will teach you all things, and bring to you remembrance all that I said to you. - John 14:25-26 (KJV)
JESUS said to him, "I am the Way, the Truth, and the Life (CAPS are mine, so I guess I just added to Scripture—woe unto me).  No one comes to the Father except through Me.  - John 14:6 (KJV)
Then Jesus came and spoke to them, saying, "All authority has been given to Me in heaven and on earth. - Matthew 28:18 (KJV)
25 Then He said to them, “O foolish ones, and slow of heart to believe in all that the prophets have spoken!  26 Ought not the Christ to have suffered these things and to enter into His glory?”  27 And beginning at Moses and all the Prophets, He expounded to them in all the Scriptures the things concerning Himself. - Luke 24:25-27 (KJV)
how I did not shrink from declaring to you anything that was profitable, and teaching you publicly and from house to house,... 27 For I did not shrink from declaring to you the whole purpose of God. - Acts 20:20-27 (KJV)
Beloved, while I was making every effort to write you about our common salvation, I felt the necessity to write to you appealing that you contend earnestly for the faith which was once for all handed down to the saints. - Jude 1:3 (KJV)
16 "I, Jesus, have sent My angel to testify to you these things for the churches I am the root and the descendant of David, the bright morning star."  17 The Spirit and the bride say, "Come” And let the one who hears say, "Come " And let the one who is thirsty come; let the one who wishes take the water of life without cost.  18 I testify to everyone who hears the words of the prophecy of this book: if anyone adds to them, God will add to him the plagues which are written in this book;  19 and if anyone takes away from the words of the book of this prophecy, God will take away his part from the tree of life and from the holy city, which are written in this book.  20 He who testifies to these things says, "Yes, I am coming quickly " Amen Come, Lord Jesus.  - Rev 22:16-20. (KJV)
 
The ‘Days’ of Genesis 1
Ken Ham [127] says that, ‘To understand the meaning of ‘day’ in Genesis 1, we need to determine how the Hebrew word for ‘day,’ yom, is used in the context of Scripture.  Consider the following:
•	A typical concordance will illustrate that yom can have a range of meanings: a period of light as contrasted to night, a 24-hour period, time, a specific point of time, or a year. 
•	A classic, well-respected Hebrew-English lexicon (a dictionary) has seven headings and many subheadings for the meaning of yom—but it defines the creation days of Genesis 1 as ordinary days under the heading “day as defined by evening and morning.” 
•	A number and the phrase “evening and morning” are used with each of the six days of creation (Gen. 1:5, 8, 13, 19, 23, 31). 
•	Outside Genesis 1, yom is used with a number 359 times, and each time it means an ordinary day.  Why would Genesis 1 be the exception? 
•	Outside Genesis 1, yom is used with the word ‘evening’ or ‘morning’ 23 times.  ‘Evening’ and ‘morning’ appear in association, but without yom, 38 times.  All 61 times the text refers to an ordinary day.  Why would Genesis 1 be the exception? 
•	In Genesis 1:5, yom occurs in context with the word ‘night.’  Outside of Genesis 1, ‘night’ is used with yom 53 times, and each time it means an ordinary day.  Why would Genesis 1 be the exception?  Even the usage of the word ‘light’ with yom in this passage determines the meaning as ordinary day. 
•	The plural of yom, which does not appear in Genesis 1, can be used to communicate a longer time period, such as “in those days.”  Adding a number here would be nonsensical.  Clearly, in Exodus 20:11, where a number is used with ‘days,’ it unambiguously refers to six earth-rotation days. 
•	There are words in biblical Hebrew (such as olam or qedem) that are very suitable for communicating long periods of time, or indefinite time, but none of these words are used in Genesis 1.15.  Alternatively, the days or years could have been compared with grains of sand if long periods were meant.
 
A close look at Genesis 1
- What Genesis 1 says and what it doesn't say -
Genesis 1: Nice to meet you
Possibly the most loved and certainly, the most famous piece of literary art ever produced may be more accurate than any of us ever expected.  In the pages that follow, we will have a look at what is known as ‘the creation account’, a report of origins that lies at the heart of all monotheistic faiths, but which has been shrouded in mythological projections and maimed by religious zeal.
In every book on Genesis 1, the same stubborn mistakes appear and before we can even make an attempt in understanding Genesis 1, we should first familiarize ourselves with what is actually going on in there.  We will be quoting from the NASB (and KJV), except that the word ‘God’ will be replaced with the name ‘Elohim’.
 
Day 1
In the Beginning Elohim created the heavens and the earth. And the earth was formless and void and darkness was over the face of the deep and the Spirit of Elohim was hovering over the surface of the waters.
Then Elohim said, "Let there be light"; and there was light. [1] (NASB)
And Elohim saw that the light was good; and Elohim separated the light from the darkness.  And Elohim called the light day and the darkness He called night.  And there was evening and there was morning, one day. [1] (NASB) 
Genesis 1:1 Hebrew Study Bible (Apostolic / Interlinear) [128]
בְּרֵאשִׁ֖ית בָּרָ֣א אֱלֹהִ֑ים אֵ֥ת הַשָּׁמַ֖יִם וְאֵ֥ת הָאָֽרֶץ׃   
KJV with Strong's [8] 
In the beginning Elohim created the heaven and the earth
Hebrew	Transliteration	Strong's	English
בְּרֵאשִׁ֖ית	be•re•shit	7225	in the beginning
בָּרָ֣א	ba•ra	1254	created
אֱלֹהִ֑ים	e•lo•him	430	God
אֵ֥ת	et	853	 
הַשָּׁמַ֖יִם	ha•sha•ma•yim	8064	the heavens
וְאֵ֥ת	ve•'et	853	 
הָאָֽרֶץ׃	ha•'a•rets.	776	the earth
The Hebrew word eres (eh'-rets) does not only denote planet earth, but also land, city, state, etc.  It denotes the solidness under foot—earth as opposed to heavens.  And before we continue, ‘sin’ has not entered creation yet—the fall has not occurred—and everything Elohim made was perfect!  Even Lucifer was created perfectly!
“You were the seal of perfection, Full of wisdom and perfect in beauty.  You were in Eden, the garden of God; Every precious stone was your covering: The sardius, topaz, and diamond, Beryl, onyx, and jasper, Sapphire, turquoise, and emerald with gold.  The workmanship of your timbrels and pipes Was prepared for you on the day you were created.  “You were the anointed cherub who covers; I established you; You were on the holy mountain of God; You walked back and forth in the midst of fiery stones.  You were perfect in your ways from the day you were created, Till iniquity was found in you. [31]
- Ezekiel 28:12-15 (NKJV)
Genesis 1:2 Hebrew Study Bible (Apostolic / Interlinear) [128]
וְהָאָ֗רֶץ הָיְתָ֥ה תֹ֙הוּ֙ וָבֹ֔הוּ וְחֹ֖שֶׁךְ עַל־ פְּנֵ֣י תְהֹ֑ום וְר֣וּחַ אֱלֹהִ֔ים מְרַחֶ֖פֶת עַל־ פְּנֵ֥י הַמָּֽיִם׃  
KJV with Strong's: “And the earth was without form and void and darkness was upon the face of the deep And the Spirit of Elohim moved upon the face of the waters.” [8]
Hebrew	Transliteration	Strong's	English
וְהָאָ֗רֶץ	ve•ha•'a•retz	776	the earth
הָיְתָ֥ה	ha•ye•tah	1961	was
תֹ֙הוּ֙	to•hu	8414	was formless
וָבֹ֔הוּ	va•vo•hu,	922	and void
וְחֹ֖שֶׁךְ	ve•cho•shech	2822	and darkness
עַל־	al-	5921	was over
פְּנֵ֣י	pe•nei	6440	the surface
תְהֹ֑ום	te•ho•vm;	8415	of the deep
וְר֣וּחַ	ve•ru•ach	7307	and the Spirit
אֱלֹהִ֔ים	e•lo•him,	430	of God
מְרַחֶ֖פֶת	me•ra•che•fet	7363	was moving
עַל־	al-	5921	over
פְּנֵ֥י	pe•nei	6440	the surface
הַמָּֽיִם׃	ham•ma•yim.	4325	of the waters

The Hebrew word for darkness is choshek.  Baker says that, “In its first occurrence, it is associated with disorder (Gen. 1:2) and is distinguished and separated from light (Gen. 1:4).” [124]  Choshek is used in the Old Testament 80 time, in in 77 instances it is translated as darkness of dark.  In Genesis 1, “darkness” means ‘darkness’—the absence of light.  In the next verse, Elohim says, “Let there be light”, which is collectively exhaustive of ‘darkness’.  That is, light is the absence of darkness.  Baker is assuming that ‘chaos’ implies disorder and darkness is the opposite of light.  On the contrary!
The Hebrew word for void is וָבֹ֔הוּ tōhû (tohuw).  It occurs in the Old Testament 20 times and is translated ‘formless’ twice.  Tohuw can also be translated ‘empty space’, ‘waste’, ‘confusion’ or ‘chaos’.  (In the KJV it is also translated ‘wilderness’ or ‘empty place’.)  Baker ascribes its use here to ‘chaos’ and ‘confusion’. [124]  Again, Baker does not understand that chaos contains unobservable order!  Tohuw is better translated as ‘empty place’ or ‘wilderness’ in this case.
The Hebrew word for void is בֹּהוּ bōhû (bohuw).  It is a masculine noun indicating ‘void’ or ‘emptiness’.  Baker says that, “It depicts the state of matter after God had created it but before He had fashioned it for habitation (Gen. 1:2).  It, therefore, describes the state of the land or earth after God judges it (Isa. 34:11; Jer. 4:23).  It is used in combination with tōhû, without form, each time.” [124]
A ‘literal’ interpretation of this verse is: “The earth was an empty place or wilderness and void, and there was darkness or an absence of light over the surface of the deep…”  If one wishes to render the verse as, “The earth was chaotic and there was darkness…”, then one is describing The Beginning before nucleosynthesis began—when the universe was not transparent and quarks could not bind to form atoms.  And chaos has order just as quantum foam and the Standard Model.  Elohim is not about disorder.  The concepts of disorder and Elohim are fundamentally impossible, and “in the beginning God…”.  As John puts it” “In the beginning was the Word” (John 1:1).  In the Beginning was ‘order’!
The Hebrew word for ‘deep’ is תְהֹ֑ום tâhom (tahowm).  This word can also be translated ‘abyss’, something that is immeasurably deep or infinite (or the extent is not visible).  There are literally two different ‘things’ in Genesis 1:2 that may be mistakenly assumed to be the same: the waters (mayim) and the deep (tahown).  Both had surfaces.  Tahown is descriptive of the universe—deep and seemingly endless.
Genesis 1:3 Hebrew Study Bible (Apostolic / Interlinear) [128]
וַיֹּ֥אמֶר אֱלֹהִ֖ים יְהִ֣י אֹ֑ור וַֽיְהִי־ אֹֽור׃  
KJV with Strong's: “And Elohim said Let there be light and there was light.” [8]
Hebrew	Transliteration	Strong's	English
וַיֹּ֥אמֶר	vai•yo•mer	559	said
אֱלֹהִ֖ים	e•lo•him	430	God
יְהִ֣י	ye•hi	1961	Let there be
אֹ֑ור	o•vr;	216	light
וַֽיְהִי־	vay•hi-	1961	and there was
אֹֽור׃	o•vr.	216	light

The Hebrew word for light is אֹ֑ור ˒ôr (ur), which also happens to be the name of the city from which Abram departed.  It is also the word used in Genesis 1: 15 to describe the “lights in the expanse of the heavens” giving ‘light’ (ur) to the earth.
Realize that darkness is not the opposite of light but the absence of it.   When light is released in a dark room, nothing leaves; nothing is replaced.  Darkness does not consist of substance; light does—photons.  Day one is not about something versus something-else, but about something-not-there versus something-there.  Elohim created everything from Himself.
A doctrine emerged around 200 A.D., which claimed that God created everything out of nothing, or in the Latin, creare ex nihilo or creatio ex nihilo.  What the Latin had tried to express, prior to this, was that strict creation is only something God can perform—by adding ex nihilo to the verb meaning to create—not that there was no pre-existing matter.  Since the “Spirit of God was moving over the face of the deep”, in Genesis 1:2, Elohim must have literally existed as matter.  Otherwise, how could He have a spirit?  The idea that Elohim is pre-exiting matter, explains quantum particles, quantum foam, and the Standard Model.
Genesis 1:4 Hebrew Study Bible (Apostolic / Interlinear) [128]
וַיַּ֧רְא אֱלֹהִ֛ים אֶת־ הָאֹ֖ור כִּי־ טֹ֑וב וַיַּבְדֵּ֣ל אֱלֹהִ֔ים בֵּ֥ין הָאֹ֖ור וּבֵ֥ין הַחֹֽשֶׁךְ׃  
KJV with Strong's: “And Elohim saw the light that it was good and Elohim divided the light from the darkness.” [8] 
Hebrew	Transliteration	Strong's	English
וַיַּ֧רְא	vai•yar•	7200	saw
אֱלֹהִ֛ים	e•lo•him	430	God
אֶת־	et-	853	 
הָאֹ֖ור	ha•'o•vr	216	the light
כִּי־	ki-	3588	that
טֹ֑וב	to•vv;	2896	was good
וַיַּבְדֵּ֣ל	vai•yav•del	914	separated
אֱלֹהִ֔ים	e•lo•him,	430	and God
בֵּ֥ין	bein	996	from
הָאֹ֖ור	ha•'o•vr	216	the light
וּבֵ֥ין	u•vein	996	from
הַחֹֽשֶׁךְ׃	ha•cho•shech.	2822	the darkness

Light and darkness are collectively exhaustive.  That is, at least one of the events must occur, but they cannot occur simultaneously.  Remember that darkness is the absence of light, so when light appears, darkness is simply not there anymore.  Thus, they are ‘separate’.
Genesis 1:5 Hebrew Study Bible (Apostolic / Interlinear) [128]
וַיִּקְרָ֨א אֱלֹהִ֤ים לָאֹור֙ יֹ֔ום וְלַחֹ֖שֶׁךְ קָ֣רָא לָ֑יְלָה וַֽיְהִי־ עֶ֥רֶב וַֽיְהִי־ בֹ֖קֶר יֹ֥ום אֶחָֽד׃ פ  
KJV with Strong's: “And Elohim called the light Day and the darkness he called Night And the evening and the morning were the first day.” [8]
Hebrew	Transliteration	Strong's	English
וַיִּקְרָ֨א	vai•yik•ra	7121	called
אֱלֹהִ֤ים	e•lo•him	430	God
לָאֹור֙	la•'o•vr	216	the light
יֹ֔ום	yo•vm,	3117	day
וְלַחֹ֖שֶׁךְ	ve•la•cho•shech	2822	and the darkness
קָ֣רָא	ka•ra	7121	called
לָ֑יְלָה	la•ye•lah;	3915	night
וַֽיְהִי־	vay•hi-	1961	and there was
עֶ֥רֶב	e•rev	6153	evening
וַֽיְהִי־	vay•hi-	1961	and there was
בֹ֖קֶר	vo•ker	1242	morning
יֹ֥ום	yo•vm	3117	day
אֶחָֽד׃	e•chad.	259	one
Day 2
Then Elohim said, "Let there be an expanse in the midst of the waters, and let it separate the waters from the waters."  And Elohim made the expanse, and separated the waters which were below the expanse from the waters which were above the expanse; and it was so.  And Elohim called the expanse heaven.  And there was evening and there was morning, a second day. [1] (NASB)
On the second day, the waters that were made on the first day are divided.  This division is called heaven, not the upper aquatic body.  The image is: lower water - heaven - upper water.  We recognize the same thematic rhythm in Genesis 15, in the cadaver vision: half-animal - God (flaming torch and fire oven) - half animal. 
Waters are again parted when the Israelites depart from Egypt, when they cross the Res Sea: waters - Israel - waters.  Finally, when Christ hangs between the two murderers we see again the same image: murderer - Christ - murderer. 
It is peculiar that the name of something that existed from the Beginning (namely heaven) is now given to the firmament (the expanse) created on Day 2.  Remember that action defines the thing; the firmament of Day 2 executes the same defining action as the heaven of Day 1.  Or else it would have a different name. 
Day 3
9 Then Elohim said, "Let the waters below the heavens be gathered into one place and let dry land appear"; and it was so.  10 And Elohim called the dry land earth, and the gathering of the waters He called seas; and Elohim saw that it was good.  11 Then God said, "Let the earth sprout vegetation, plants yielding seed, and fruit trees bearing fruit after their kind, with seed in them, on the earth"; and it was so.  12 And the earth brought forth vegetation, plants yielding seed after their kind, and trees bearing fruit, with seed in them, after their kind; and Elohim saw that it was good.  13 And there was evening and there was morning, a third day. [1] (NASB)
On the third day, something is done to the lower aquatic body and dry land appears.  But the water is not moved away so that the dry land beneath it could appear.  It reads: "Let the lower waters be collected to one place, or a place of oneness, and let dry land appear."  This is not about waters retreating, not a low-tide story, but rather the peculiar message that dry land appeared when the lower waters converged. 
The verb qawa, ‘to collect’ is a special word, not as often used as in our languages.  It occurs besides Genesis 1 in the strongly Messianic passage of Jeremiah 3:17, “At that time they shall call Jerusalem ‘The Throne of the Lord,’ and all the nations will be gathered to it, to Jerusalem, for the Name of the Lord...”  All other occurrences of the word qawa are translated with forms of ‘to hope’ or ‘await eagerly’. [124] 
As with the word ‘heaven’, the word ‘earth’ is re-applied.
Oops!  Where did the water come from?  “In the beginning God created the heavens and the earth…and the Spirit of God was moving over the surface of the waters.”  (Genesis 1:1-2)  Remember our discussion of The Beginning Nucleosynthesis?  As soon as electrons connected to protons to make hydrogen atoms, the universe became transparent and light could travel unobstructed from one region to another.  Atoms were able to stick together, to form an economy based on thermodynamic and electromagnetic interactions.  Molecules could form as soon as their counterparts were formed.  Two hydrogen atoms bond with one oxygen atom to form a water molecule.  
Water is the most abundant compound on Earth’s surface, covering about 70%.  In nature, it exists in liquid, solid, and gaseous states.  It is in dynamic equilibrium between the liquid and gas states at standard temperature and pressure.  At room temperature, it is a tasteless and odorless liquid, nearly colorless with a hint of blue.  Many substances dissolve in water and it is commonly referred to as the universal solvent.  Water is the only common substance found naturally in all three common states of matter and it is essential for all life on Earth.
Recall that hydrogen and oxygen are two of the most abundant elements in the universe.  Together they make oxygen.  Water makes up 70% of the earth—the other 30 percent is made up of other ‘stuff’ that was also created at The Beginning, when Elohim created it.  Water was created at The Beginning as part of the universe; as some percentage of ‘earth’; as part of nucleosynthesis; and was gathered together on Day 3.  Humankind is 55% water.  Water is a prerequisite for life.  The original material used to form man was earth, which included water.  The Hebrew word used in Genesis 2:7 is עָפָר ‘aphar’, meaning ‘mud’.  The mud of the אֲדָמָה ‘adamah’ or ‘earth’, which contains water!  Oh, one other thing was needed to make man: “[Elohim] breathed into his nostrils the breath of life; and man became a living being.”  But we are jumping ahead of ourselves.
Day 4
14 Then Elohim said, "Let there be lights in the expanse of the heavens to separate the day from the night, 15 and let them be for signs, and for seasons, and for days, and years, and let them be for lights in the expanse of the heavens to give light on the earth"; and it was so.  16 Elohim made the two great lights, the greater light to govern the day, and the lesser light to govern the night; He made the stars also.  17 Elohim placed them in the expanse of the heavens to give light on earth, 18 and to govern the day and the night, and to separate the light from the darkness; and Elohim saw that it was good.  19 There was evening and there was morning, a fourth day. [1] (NASB)
The Creator repeats the creation command of day one, but in plural: Let there be lights! 
Then He does not make two (Heb.: shenayim) great lights but second or secondary (Heb.: sheni) great lights.  And that is what they are, great lights, a great light and a lesser light, which is still great.  Stars are mentioned in Genesis 1, but the sun and the moon are not mentioned.  Moses had words for sun and moon and he does not use them here.  Instead, he uses the phrase ‘great light’.  Another occurrence of the phrase ‘great light’ is the Messianic paragraph of Isaiah 9:2-7, “The people who walk in darkness will see a great light.”  Certainly, this image resonates with our solar system—the Psalmist seems to think so; 136:9—but we must conclude that our solar system is organized after a pattern that is even more fundamental. 
7 To Him who made the great lights, For His lovingkindness is everlasting: 8 The sun to rule by day, For His lovingkindness is everlasting,9 The moon and stars to rule by night, For His lovingkindness is everlasting. [1]
- Psalm 109:7-9 (NASB)
God likens Abraham's offspring to the ‘dust of the earth’, but He also likens them to the ‘stars in the heavens’ (15:5).  Daniel adds, “And those who have insight will shine brightly like the brightness of the expanse of heaven, and those who lead the many to righteousness, like the stars forever and ever” (12:3). 
Day 5
20 Then Elohim said, "Let the waters teem with swarms of living creatures, and let birds fly above the earth in the open expanse of the heavens.”  21 Elohim created the great sea monsters, and every living creature that moves, with which the waters swarmed after their kind, and every winged bird after its kind; and Elohim saw that it was good.  22 Elohim blessed them saying, "Be fruitful and multiply, and fill the waters in the seas, and let birds multiply on the earth.”  23 There was evening and there was morning, a fifth day. [1] (NASB)
The fifth day leads off with the creation of ‘swarmers that swarm’ to populate the waters.  The word sharas (teem or swarm) is simply repeated: swarmers that swarm.  What exactly those swarming swarmers are is not explained. 
The Hebrew word translated 'teem' or swarm is שָׁרַץ (šhāraṣ).  It has two main definitions [124]: 
I. Sharas is verb meaning to swarm, to breed abundantly, or to multiply.  It means to teem, to swarm in numbers and rate of birth and multiplication.  It is used of the land and waters swarming with swarming creatures (Gen. 1:20, 21; Ex. 8:3[7:28]; Ps. 105:30).  It is used figuratively of Israel’s birth rate in Egypt, her unusual multiplication (Ex. 1:7).  Certain swarming things were unclean to Israel (Lev. 11:29, 41, 43, 46).  But swarming creatures will be part of the new rejuvenated Israel (Ezek. 47:9).  [124]
II. Sharas is also a verb indicating to creep.  The same verb (or its homonym, a word that sounds the same) refers to creeping things, insects, lizards, etc., on the earth (Gen. 7:21; Lev. 11:29, 41, 42, 43, 46).  These things were detestable to Israel. [124]
The Hebrew word translated as ‘living’ is חַי chay, חַיָּה chayyāhIt is a feminine noun meaning ‘an animal’, ‘a beast’, a ‘living thing’.  The basic meaning is living things, but its most common translation is ‘animals’ or ‘beasts’.  The word refers to all kinds of animals and beasts of the field or earth (Gen. 1:24, 25; 1 Sam. 17:46) and sometimes stands in parallel with birds of the air (Ezek. 29:5).  The nations, such as Egypt, were referred to metaphorically as beasts (Ps. 68:30[31]).  Beasts were categorized in various ways: beasts of burden (Isa. 46:1); land animals (Gen. 1:28; 8:19); cattle (Num. 35:3); sea creatures (Ps. 104:25); clean, edible creatures (Lev. 11:47; 14:4); unclean, nonedible creatures (Lev. 5:2); large and small creatures (Ps. 104:25). [124]
The Hebrew word translated ‘creatures’ is נֶפֶשׁ nepheš.  It is a feminine noun meaning ‘breath’, ‘the inner being with its thoughts and emotions’.  It is used 753 times in the Old Testament and has a broad range of meanings.  Most of its uses fall into these categories: breathe, literally or figuratively (Jer. 15:9); the inner being with its thoughts and emotions (Judg. 10:16; Prov. 14:10; Ezek. 25:6); and by extension, the whole person (Gen. 12:5; Lev. 4:2; Ezek. 18:4).  Moreover, the term can cover the animating force of a person or his or her dead body (Lev. 21:11; Num. 6:6; Jer. 2:34).  It is even applied to animals in a number of the above senses: the breath (Job 41:21[13]); the inner being (Jer. 2:24); the whole creature (Gen. 1:20); and the animating force (Lev. 17:11).  When this word is applied to a person, it does not refer to a specific part of a human being.  The Scriptures view a person as a composite whole, fully relating to God and not divided in any way (Deut. 6:5; cf. 1 Thess. 5:23). [124]
Then birds arise to the scene to ‘fly over the earth’ and ‘on the face of the heavens’.  And after the birds, the great tannin is called into being.  We do not know what tannin, however.  But the creature shows up a lot in Scriptures.  Usually as something big and strong, but not always necessarily ocean dwelling.  Living nephes (breathing), sharas (organisms)—level two of the universal set! 
Day 6 
24 Then Elohim said, "Let the earth bring forth living creatures after their kind: cattle and creeping things and beasts of the earth after their kind; and it was so.  25 Elohim made the beasts of the earth after their kind, and the cattle after their kind, and everything that creeps on the ground after its kind; and Elohim saw that it was good. [1] (NASB)
26 Then Elohim said, "Let Us make man in Our image, according to Our likeness; and let him rule over the fish of the sea and over the birds of the sky and over the cattle and over all the earth, and over every creeping thing that creeps on earth.”  27 Elohim created man in His own image, in the image of Elohim He created him; male and female he created them.  28 Elohim blessed them; and Elohim said to them, "Be fruitful and multiply, and fill the earth, and subdue it; and rule over the fish of the sea and over the birds of the sky, and over every living thing that moves on the earth.”  29 Then Elohim said, "Behold, I have given you every plant yielding seed that is on the surface of all the earth, and every tree which has fruit yielding seed; it shall be food for you; 30 and to every beast of the earth and to every bird in the sky and to everything that moves on earth which has life, I have given every green plant for food"; and it was so.31 Elohim saw all that He had made, and behold, it was very good.  And there was evening and there was morning, the sixth day. [1] (NASB)
On the sixth day are born the behema, which are the larger four-footed animals: cattle but also wild animals. 
The Hebrew word for cattle is בְּהֵמָה behēmāh.  It is a feminine noun, usually functioning collectively, meaning animals, beasts, livestock, and cattle.  It takes on the following meanings in context: animals or beasts in general (Ex. 9:9; 1 Kgs. 4:33[5:13]); wild animals; beasts of the earth (Deut. 28:26; 32:24; 1 Sam. 17:44).  Often it refers to cattle or livestock (NIV, NASB, Gen. 1:24–26; 2:20; 8:1; 47:18); beasts of burden (Gen. 34:23); or beasts for riding (Neh. 2:12, 14).  [124]
After the behēmāh the ‘creepers’ are made.  As with the swarmers, the word ramas is simply repeated: ‘creepers that creep’, most often denoting smaller animals such as reptiles. 
The Hebrew word translated ‘creepers’ is רֶמֶשׂ remeś.  It is a masculine collective noun meaning creeping things, moving things.  It describes a large category of living beings that God created.  It does not include large animals or birds.  It includes many small animals, reptiles, beings that crawl, creep, move randomly, etc., along the earth.  God created them (Gen. 1:24–26).  The phrase from mankind (˒āḏām) to animals (beasts, behēmāh) to creeping things (remes) to fowl (˓ôp̱) is inclusive of what God affected in the flood (Gen. 6:7; 6:20).  It indicates the extent of Solomon’s great knowledge of the world (1 Kgs. 4:33[5:13]).  This word also describes swarming things that inhabit the seas (Ps. 104:25).  Even these became idols to Israel (Ezek. 8:10).  But, in the time of restoration, even these beings will be regarded as important by God (Hos. 2:18[20]).  It is used in a simile comparing rebellious Israel to these creatures (Hab. 1:14). [124]
The Hebrew word for ‘living’ is חַי ḥay, or   חַיָּה ḥayyāh, and for ‘inner being’, is nephes (See Day 5).
Two further categories of animals are noted: wild animals or animals of prey and animal or beastlike beings.  God made the wild animals of the field.  Sometimes the Lord used wild beasts as instruments of His judgments (Ezek. 14:15; 33:27), but on other occasions He protected His people from ravenous beasts (Gen. 37:20; Lev. 26:6).  At any rate, vicious beasts will not inhabit the land of the Lord’s restored people (Isa. 35:9).  The bizarre living beings mentioned in Ezekiel 1:5, 13, 22; 3:13 were like birds and animals but were composite beings.  They could not be described adequately by human language, for they also had the forms of humans, each with faces of a man, lion, ox, and eagle.  However, they did not resemble flesh and blood in their appearance (Ezek. 1:13) and were tied to the movement of the Spirit (Ezek. 1:20).
Then come the ‘beasts of the earth,’ a word derived from the verb ‘to live,’ which covers pretty much everything that lives.  The Hebrew word is חָיָה ḥāyyāh, a verb meaning to be alive, to live, to keep alive.  This verb is used numerous times in Scripture.  It is used in the sense of flourishing (Deut. 8:1; 1 Sam. 10:24; Ps. 22:26[27]); or to convey that an object is safe (Gen. 12:13; Num. 14:38; Josh. 6:17).  It connotes reviving in Ezekiel 37:5 and 1 Kings 17:22 or healing in Joshua 5:8 and 2 Kings 8:8.  Genesis often uses the word when people are kept alive in danger (Gen. 6:19, 20; 19:19; 47:25; 50:20).  Also, the word is used in the genealogies of Genesis (Gen. 5:3–30; 11:11–26).  Psalm 119 employs this word to say that God’s Word preserves life (Ps. 119:25, 37, 40, and 88).  Many verses instruct hearers to obey a command (either God’s or a king’s) in order to live (Gen. 20:7; Prov. 4:4; Jer. 27:12). [124]
Finally, God makes man.  The word for man, adam is the masculine form of the feminine adamah, and is one of a few words for man.  Adamah means ‘earth’ or ‘arable land’—land that together with water makes aphar or ‘mud’.  This particular word, adam, denotes man as a creature made from mud of the earth, a ‘mudling’, in short—like the potter’s clay.  “But now, O LORD, You are our Father; we are the clay, and You are the potter; And all we are the work of Your hand.” [31] (Isaiah 64:8, NKJV)  (See also Jeremiah 18:1-6, Isaiah 29:16, 45:9, 64:8, Job 10:9.)
In His Image
The famous ‘in His image’ part has lead tradition to believe that God is a biped, like us.  But that idea is countered by the notion that God has no space-time parameters, and does not look like anything.  The text actually uses two phrases “in Our image” and “to Our likeness”.  First, the ‘image of God' is not a graven image.
The Hebrew word translated ‘image’ is צֶלֶם ṣelem.  It is a masculine noun meaning ‘an image’, ‘a likeness’, ‘a statue’, ‘a model’, ‘a drawing’, or ‘a shadow’.  (Remember type-Theology?)  The word means image or likeness; its most celebrated theological and anthropological use was to depict human beings as made in God’s own image (Gen. 1:26, 27; 5:3).  People continue to be in His image even after the fall, although the image is marred (Gen. 9:6), and still serves as the basis of the prohibition not to kill human beings. [124]
It is used metaphorically to depict persons as shadows, phantoms, or unknowing, senseless, fleeting beings carrying out the motions of life (Ps. 39:6[7]); unless they have hope in God (see Ps. 39:7[8]).  In a similar vein, the wicked before the Lord are considered as mere dreams or fantasies (Ps. 73:20).
The word is also used in a concrete sense to depict images cut out of or molded from various materials.  The word describes the images or idols of foreign or strange gods (2 Kgs. 11:18; Amos 5:26).  The people of Israel produced images used as idols from their own jewelry (Ezek. 7:20; 16:17).  Israel was, on its entrance into Canaan, to destroy all the molten images of the heathen (Num. 33:52).  In Ezekiel 23:14, this word refers to pictures of Babylonians that enticed the people of Israel into apostasy when they saw them (Ezek. 23:14). [124]
One of the greatest actors of all time is Morgan Freeman  (right [129]), but we are not created according to his likeness—although we might wish.  The Hebrew word translated ‘likeness’ is  דְּמוּת demûṯ.  It is a feminine noun meaning likeness.  This word is often used to create a simile by comparing two unlike things, such as the wickedness of people and the venom of a snake (Ps. 58:4[5]); the sound of God’s gathering warriors and of many people (Isa. 13:4); or the angelic messenger and a human being (Dan. 10:16).  Additionally, this word is used in describing humans being created in the image or likeness of God (Gen. 1:26; 5:1); the likeness of Seth to Adam (Gen. 5:3); the figures of oxen in the temple (2 Chr. 4:3); the pattern of the altar (2 Kgs. 16:10).  But most often, Ezekiel uses it as he describes his visions by comparing what he saw to something similar on earth (Ezek. 1:5, 16; 10:1).  [124]
Daniel 10:16 says, “And, behold, one like the similitude [or likeness] of the sons of men touched my lips: then I opened my mouth, and spake, and said unto him that stood before me, O my lord, by the vision my sorrows are turned upon me, and I have retained no strength.” [8] (brackets added)
Second, those who have seen God do not describe him as a self-portrait of a man.  Take for instance Revelation 4:2:3:
2 Immediately I was in the Spirit; and behold,  a throne was standing in heaven, and One sitting on the throne.  3 And He who was sitting was like a jasper stone and a sardius in appearance; and there was a rainbow around the throne, like an emerald in appearance.
Now it could be the case that John recognized God as a ‘man-image’ and did not feel kike he had to describe that portion of the scene.  John uses the phrase, “καὶ ἐπὶ τὸν θρόνον καθήμενος” in verse 2, which translated literally is ‘and upon a throne sitting.’  The KJV and NASB add ‘one’ to the participle ‘sitting’.  In verse three he writes, “καὶ ὸ καθήμενος”, which literally translated is ‘and he sitting’.  No direct reference to a ‘man-image.’
Another instance is Isaiah 6:1:
In the year of King Uzziah’s death I saw the Lord sitting on a throne, lofty and exalted, with the train of His robe filling the temple.
Isaiah uses the Hebrew word אֲדֹנָי ˒aḏōnāy for Lord.  It is a masculine noun used exclusively of God.  It is often used in place of the divine name YHWH, which was held by later Jewish belief to be too holy to utter.  This designation points to the supreme authority or power of God (Ps. 2:4; Isa. 6:1).  The word was often combined with the divine name to reinforce the notion of God’s matchlessness (e.g., Ezek. 20:3; Amos 7:6). [124]  Again no direct reference to a ‘man-image.’
It is presumptuous for us to think God looks like us.  Rather, we are made in His image—the triune one referred to as ‘us’ and ‘our’ in Genesis 2—and that image is much more than we could possible imagine in our fallen condition.  Perhaps that is why John and Isaiah had trouble describing Him.
The intended ‘man’ or ‘God-image’ is probably not the bipedal snapshot we tend to keep in frames.  Our two-dimensional snapshots are a mere slice of the four dimensional space-time worms we really are.  Perhaps the ‘image of God’ is the original instance of the Universal Mold we discussed in chapter 12. 
It now becomes possible to see Genesis 1 for what it really is.  Not a messy rendering of ancient myth, but rather the most intelligent document ever entrusted to man.
Oh by the way, the seventh day never ended in Genesis 1.  There is no mention of evening and morning like in the first six days.  Not to imply the God is simply resting and not interacting dynamically.  On the contrary, Colossians tells us that:
The Son is the image of the invisible God, the firstborn over all creation.  For in him all things were created: things in heaven and on earth, visible and invisible, whether thrones or powers or rulers or authorities; all things have been created through him and for him.  He is before all things, and in him all things hold together.  And he is the head of the body, the church; he is the beginning and the firstborn from among the dead, so that in everything he might have the supremacy.  For God was pleased to have all his fullness dwell in him, and through him to reconcile to himself all things, whether things on earth or things in heaven, by making peace through his blood, shed on the cross. [31]
-Colossians 1:15-20 (NKJV)
On the sixth day, we see level three of the Universal Set.  So what is The Beginning?  Where is level four of the Universal Set?  It already existed!
Literal or Figurative?
Genesis 1 should be considered with a literal interpretation.  If we read some esoteric, symbolic meaning into darkness and light, then we need to use the same genre to translate ‘day’.  Hence, ‘day’ can take on a number of meanings and durations.  If we take a literal ‘day’ in Genesis 1, then we need to take darkness and light literally for what they are.  Like “Love and Marriage, the go together like a horse and carriage.” 
I AM WHO I AM
1 Now Moses was tending the flock of Jethro his father-in-law, the priest of Midian, and he led the flock to the far side of the wilderness and came to Horeb, the mountain of God.  2 There the angel of the LORD appeared to him in flames of fire from within a bush.  Moses saw that though the bush was on fire it did not burn up.  3 So Moses thought, “I will go over and see this strange sight—why the bush does not burn up.” [5]
- Exodus 3:1-3 (NIV)
Many people wanted to burn President George W. Bush  (left [6]), but his integrity was above and beyond reproach, and never became a “burning bush.”  So what Moses saw was not George.  However, when Moses met God and learned His name, he was probably as clueless as I would be if elected president.  Moses had probably never seen a burning bush that was not consumed, I doubt if he had ever heard one talk.  When Moses asked God his names, God replied, “I exist whom existed” (loose translation).  Moses might have asked, “What kind of name is that?”, but I believe he was too overwhelmed with God’s response.  I am still pondering it myself!
God said to Moses, “I AM WHO I AM”; and He said, “Thus you shall say to the sons of Israel, ‘I AM has sent me to you.’” [1]  (Exodus 3:14, NASB) 
The Hebrew word translated ‘I AM’ is הָיָה hāyāh.  It is a verb meaning to exist, to be, to become, to happen, to come to pass, to be done.  It is used over 3,500 times in the Old Testament.  In the simple stem, the verb often means to become, to take place, to happen.  It indicates that something has occurred or come about, such as events that have turned out a certain way (1 Sam. 4:16); something has happened to someone, such as Moses (Ex. 32:1, 23; 2 Kgs. 7:20); or something has occurred just as God said it would (Gen. 1:7, 9).  Often a special Hebrew construction using the imperfect form of the verb asserts that something came to pass (cf. Gen. 1:7, 9).  Less often, the construction is used with the perfect form of the verb to refer to something coming to pass in the future (Isa. 7:18, 21; Hos. 2:16). [124]
The verb is used to describe something that comes into being or arises.  For instance, a great cry arose in Egypt when the firstborn were killed in the tenth plague (Ex. 12:30; cf. Gen. 9:16; Mic. 7:4); and when God commanded light to appear, and it did (Gen. 1:3).  It is used to join the subject and verb as in Genesis 1:2 where the earth was desolate and void, or to say Adam and Eve were naked (Gen. 2:25).  With certain prepositions, it can mean to follow or to be in favor of someone (Ps. 124:1, 2).  The verb is used with a variety of other words, normally prepositions, to express subtle differences in meaning, such as to be located somewhere (Ex. 1:5); to serve or function as something (e.g., gods [Ex. 20:3]); to become something or as something, as when a person becomes a living being (Gen. 2:7); to be with or by someone (Deut. 22:2); to be or come on someone or something (e.g., the fear of humans on the beasts [Gen. 9:2]); to express the idea of better than or a comparison (Ezek. 15:2), as in the idea of too small (Ex. 12:4). [124]
In The Beginning was the Grand Unified Force.  No start point!  No outside!  God simply existed in an indescribable way—not as the image of man.  He is too amazing for that.  So amazing that none who have been in a position to see Him can describe Him adequately.  We can talk about His goodness, His glory, His presence, but not His likeness.  Look at Moses in Exodus 33.
Exodus 33:19-23:
19 And He said, “I Myself will make all My goodness pass before you, and will proclaim the name of the Lord before you; and I will be gracious to whom I will be gracious, and will show compassion on whom I will show compassion.”  20 But He said, “You cannot see My face, for no man can see Me and live!”  21 Then the Lord said, “Behold, there is a place by Me, and you shall stand there on the rock; 22 and it will come about, while My glory is passing by, that I will put you in the cleft of the rock and cover you with My hand until I have passed by.  23 “Then I will take My hand away and you shall see My back, but My face shall not be seen.” [1] (NASB)
The Hebrew word translated ‘goodness’ in verse 19 is טוּב ṭûḇ.  It is a masculine noun meaning property, goods, goodness, fairness, and beauty.  The root concept of this noun is that of desirability for enjoyment.  It is used to identify the personal property of an individual (Gen. 24:10); the plentiful harvest of the land (Neh. 9:36; Jer. 2:7); items of superior quality and desirability (2 Kgs. 8:9); inward joy (Isa. 65:14); the manifest goodness of the Lord (Ex. 33:19; Ps. 25:7).  Notably, the psalmist employs the word to describe the state of spiritual blessing (Ps. 31:19[20]; 65:4[5]). [124]
The Hebrew word translated ‘face’ in verse 20 is פָּנֶה pāneh,  פָּנִים pāniym.  It is a masculine plural noun meaning a face.  Although the literal meaning of face is possible (Gen. 43:31; Lev. 13:41; 1 Kgs. 19:13), most of the time this word occurs in a figurative, idiomatic phrase.  Face can be a substitute for the entire person (Ex. 33:14, 15); or it can be a reflection of the person’s mood or attitude: defiant (Jer. 5:3); ruthless (Deut. 28:50); joyful (Job 29:24); humiliated (2 Sam. 19:5[6]); terrified (Isa. 13:8); displeased (Gen. 4:5).  It is also used to indicate direction (Gen. 31:21); or purpose (Jer. 42:15, 17).  This noun also designates the top or surface of something: the ground (Gen. 2:6; 4:14); a field (Isa. 28:25); or water (Gen. 1:2).  It also connotes the front of something, like a pot (Jer. 1:13); or an army (Joel 2:20).  With various prepositions, pānı̂m takes on the nature of a particle and expresses such concepts as upon (Ex. 23:17; Lev. 14:53); before a place (Num. 8:22); before a time (Ezek. 42:12; Amos 1:1); in the presence of (Esth. 1:10). [124]
And He said, “My presence shall go with you, and I will give you rest.” [1] 
- Exodus 33:14 (NASB)

The Hebrew word translated as ‘the Lord’ in verse 21 is יְהוָֹה yehōwāh.  It is a noun meaning God.  The word refers to the proper name of the God of Israel, particularly the name by which He revealed Himself to Moses (Ex. 6:2, 3).  The divine name has traditionally not been pronounced, primarily out of respect for its sacredness (cf. Ex. 20:7; Deut. 28:58).  Until the Renaissance, it was written without vowels in the Hebrew text of the Old Testament, being rendered as YHWH.  However, since that time, the vowels of another word, ˒aḏōnāy, have been supplied in hopes of reconstructing the pronunciation.  Although the exact derivation of the name is uncertain, most scholars agree that its primary meaning should be understood in the context of God’s existence, namely, that He is the “I AM THAT I AM” (Ex. 3:14), the One who was, who is, and who always will be (cf. Rev. 11:17).  Older translations of the Bible and many newer ones employ the practice of rendering the divine name in capital letters, to distinguish it from other Hebrew words.  It is most often rendered as Lord (Gen. 4:1; Deut. 6:18; Ps. 18:31[32]; Jer. 33:2; Jon. 1:9) but also as God (Gen. 6:5; 2 Sam. 12:22) or JEHOVAH (Ps. 83:18[19]; Isa. 26:4).  The frequent appearance of this name in relation to God’s redemptive work underscores its tremendous importance (Lev. 26:45; Ps. 19:14[15]).  Also, it is sometimes compounded with another word to describe the character of the Lord in greater detail (see Gen. 22:14; Ex. 17:15; Judg. 6:24). [124]
The Hebrew word used for ‘glory’ in verse 22 is kāḇôḏ, כָּבֹד kāḇōḏ.  It is a masculine singular noun meaning honor, glory, majesty, wealth.  This term is commonly used of God (Ex. 33:18; Ps. 72:19; Isa. 3:8; Ezek. 1:28); humans (Gen. 45:13; Job 19:9; Ps. 8:5[6]; 21:5[6]); and objects (1 Sam. 2:8; Esth. 1:4; Isa. 10:18), particularly of the ark of the covenant (1 Sam. 4:21, 22). [124]
Moses recoded the story of creation and he recorded his own experience with God.  God was his tutor, his master, his deliver, but Moses never saw His image.
 
Genesis 1 and Chaotic Set Theory
- Using Genesis 1 to understand Chaotic Set Theory -
"And there are three that bear witness on the earth: the Spirit, and the water, and the blood; and these three agree as one." [31]
- 1 John 5:8 (NKJV)
The Chaotic Set
For all kinds of reasons, humankind has been projecting the weirdest tales upon the creation account, and for many reasons more, some elements from the story were blatantly deleted, while others were almost randomly added.  Today however, armed with our substantial yet incomplete knowledge of the origins—through science—we are allowed to not only pierce the heart of the universe, to understand it using Scripture.
Wait a minute!  Did I say we could understand science using the Bible?  Did I say the Bible is like a commentary on Science?  I think I did!  But it is more than that: it is a commentary on faith, a commentary on morality, a commentary on general behavior, a commentary on government and leadership.  Perhaps commentary is to week of a word!  It is a handbook on living, a handbook on parenting, a handbook on conflict resolution, and handbook on business management.  You can use it as a math text (remember the word problem posed in Daniel 9).  You can use it as a science text—really.  How did Philip get from his location to the Ethiopian?  How long did it take?  What physical principle may have been involved?  Oh, what about Genesis 1?
A long hard look at Genesis 1 and the sequential Scriptures that explain Genesis 1 reveals the following (in the pages to come we will examine the proof and consequences):
Our world so far develops in three distinct but intimately related self-similar ‘periods’ that cover the creation of matter, life and mind.  The catch is that these three periods develop according to one single pattern, which is the meta-narrative behind all creation.  Ergo: matter, life and mind are self-similar, and Genesis 1 is the meta-narrative of all development: the scaffold in which the entire universe, from beginning to end, was created.
We now use Genesis 1 or the eyes of creation to look at the Chaotic Set Theory, or more specifically, the Mandelbrot Set and the Universal Set.  Where the Mandelbrot Set consists of snowmen inside bigger snowmen and the Universal Set of little sets within big ones, the Chaotic Set consists of periods within periods within periods. 
Identifying the borders of the periods in the Biblical narrative.
When Jesus is asked about the end of the age, He likens that particular event to the days of Noah.  And He says a remarkable thing: "For as in those days which were before the flood they were eating and drinking, they were marrying and giving in marriage, until the day that Noah entered the ark, and they did not understand until the flood came and took them all away.”  (Matt 24:38-39) [1]
There are two peculiar words in this sentence, words that are commonly not very accurately translated.  First, the verb that describes the motion ‘takes away’ (...and took them all away) is the Greek verb αἴρω, airo, with which a distinctive upward motion is indicated—to take up, to lift up, to raise.  The other important word is the one which describes the ignorance of Noah's peers is egnōsan, which is the aorist tense of the verb ginosko, which means to know in a general, in a completed sense.  This verb is usually accompanied with the object of understanding, but not here.  And so this line is not about the people not knowing about the flood, but completely not knowing in general.  This verb is also used in Matt. 6:3, when Jesus says, “let not your left hand know what your right hand does.”  This is something an ‘ordinary’ mind cannot do.  Jesus could be saying that the intellectual mind commenced in the Noahic flood.  And before the flood, there was little or no distinction between animal mind and human mind.  The Noahic flood tells the story of how the human mind broke away from the mental symmetry that existed in the animal realm.
This may seem horribly unbiblical but as usual, our intuition leads us astray.  There are at least two statements in the Bible that declare a full human-and animal-mind symmetry: 
But these men revile the things which they do not understand; and the things which they know by instinct, like unreasoning animals, by these things they are destroyed. [1] 
- Jude 10 (NASB)
I said to myself concerning the sons of men, "God has surely tested them in order for them to see that they are but beasts." [1] 
- Eccl. 3:18 (NASB)
From Adam up to Noah tells us the story of the development of life in general (on a complexity-axis, as well as a time-axis), and life begins in Adam as described in Genesis 2:7.  We know this because of Eve it was said that “she was the mother of all living things”—hayyah.  (Genesis 3:20)  The Hebrew word for ‘mother’ comes from the same word from which the word for ‘nation’ or ‘people’ is derived.  Hence the phrases Mother Babylon and Mother Jerusalem.  The phrase ‘all life’ or ‘all living things” returns six times in Scriptures and never just mankind is meant.  Hence Eve is the ‘mother of all life’; all living things.
Wait a minute!  We also know that God created all animals and plants apart from Adam, so there were distinct entities.  But there was symmetry.
Adam is the first living creature, but life as a concept or as a principle is introduced earlier in Genesis, namely on the fifth day.  Genesis 2:7 reads literally: ‘and he became the adam for the life soul’.  The particle that means ‘for’ is left out in translations so that our translations fit our theology—maybe because its transliteration (l') is so weird.  Even in the 1 Corinthians 15:45 quote the particle eis, a particle with the primary idea of motion into or towards a thing, is commonly ignored.  The Hebrew is written as (reading right to left):
חַיָּה לְנֶפֶשׁ הָאָדָם וַיְהִי
Hebrew	Transliteration	Strong’s No.	Translation
וַ	wa	9007	and, also, therefore, then, yet
הָיָה	hayah	1961	to exist, be or becomes, come to pass
הָ		9005	The (definite article)
אָדָם	adam
0120	a human being; individual or species—mankind 
לָ	l' 	9009	to, for, towards, in regard to
נֶפֶשׁ	nephesh	5315	soul, self, life, creature, person, appetite, mind, living being,
    desire, emotion, passion
חַי	chay	2416	living, alive; living thing, animal, community
But the truth is that just like the Son—the second Adam—existed before Jesus emerged in bodily form (the incarnation), so existed life before there were corporeal manifestations—“I am… the life.” (John 14:16).
(And if you are wondering why God does not look like our Adam, you probably skipped the chapter on the Universal Set, or the previous chapter).
Three major reason to read the periods of the Chaotic Set in Genesis
The first set of confirmations is provided by indirect references in the sequential Scripture, such as the ones noted above. 
Second, every realm is heralded by a big flood.  The first ‘flood’ is the great creational flood of Genesis 1:2—the bonding of two hydrogen atoms with one oxygen atom to make a water molecule—after which, we may suspect, matter (and space-time) commenced.  The second ‘flood’ is the Gen 2:6 flood—but streams came up from the earth and watered the whole surface of the ground [5]—after which life began (2:7).  The third ‘flood’ is the famous one, the flood of Noah, after which the human mind began to distinguish itself from the animal ‘mind’. 
But the most compelling reason is the Name-change of the Creator.  In chapter 17, we have already pointed at the importance of names in Scriptures, and the power of the name-change principle.  Just as a painter who creates a rose will make a different thing than a sculptor who makes a rose, God called Elohim  will create different things than when He is called Yahweh Elohim  or Dabar Yahweh . 
The Names of God are important because, as is with any name in Scripture, they are stylized repoussoirs  of His activities, which define Him at that moment in the Text. 
Summary of the Chaotic Set
Realms:	Matter
Life
Mind
Biblical coverage:	Gen 1 to 2:4	Gen 2 to 7	Gen 8 to Revelation

Creator's Name:	Elohim
Yahweh Elohim
Dabar Yahweh
Flood:	Gen 1:2,
Spirit moving over the waters
Gen 2:6,
Mist waters the whole ground	Gen 7-8,
Noah's flood


"And there are three that bear witness on the earth; the Spirit, and the water, and the blood; and the three agree as one." [31] 
- 1 John 5:8 (NKJV)
Water	The energy from which matter came (E=mc2)

Blood	Life

Spirit
Mind addressed by the Word of God, first precarnate (from Abraham up to the birth of Christ) then incarnate (from Christ up to now)

The three periods themselves also follow the creation week; every period is like a day of the creation week.  Notice that the week is like a day inverted.  A creation-day starts out with dark (darkness was over the surface), then light (let there be light).  The week starts out with light, then dark.  The difference is that on a day the elements emerge and need to move towards each other.  A week starts out with a light part and the elements of the dark part that follows become a multiple manifestation of the initial light.  After all, Christ was ‘in the earth’ for three days, and He would restore the Temple in three days.
The fourth day is the day of Christ incarnate: first as a single ‘human’ God, and then as the Body of Christ; stars, the offspring of Abraham.  
It now becomes fairly simple to align the various scientific records with the Creation Week.  The Bible explained science before man ‘created’ it.  The Bible may be the key to expanding our understanding of science.
 
Creation Explains Quantum ?
- The Rest of the Creation Story -
What Scripture Says
I hear a lot of ‘hype’ about Genesis 1 from all sides (young-earth creationist, old-earth creationist, intelligent design proponents, etc.) but let’s not forget that the Bible is coherent and must be translated holistically, and there is more about creation in the Bible other than Genesis 1.
Who is the Creator?  Christ the Son
15 He is the image of the invisible God, the firstborn of every creature.  16 For by Him were all things created that are in heaven and that are on earth, visible and invisible, whether thrones or dominions or principalities or powers: all things were created by Him and for Him. [130] 
- Colossians 1:15-16 (KJ21®)
Also, the following Scripture confirms that Christ is the Creator: Psalm 148:1-14, Isaiah 40:28, Isaiah 42:5, Isaiah 43:7, Isaiah 45:7-9, Isaiah 45:11-13, Isaiah 45:17-19, Amos 4:13.
What is the glue of creation?  Christ the Son
17 He is before all things, and in him all things hold together.  18 And he is the head of the body, the church; he is the beginning and the firstborn from among the dead, so that in everything he might have the supremacy. [5]
- Colossians 1:17-18 (NIV)
Where did life come from?  Christ the Son
1 In the beginning was the Word, and the Word was with God, and the Word was God.  2 He was in the beginning with God.  3 All things were made through Him, and without Him nothing was made that was made.  4 In Him was life, and the life was the light of men.  5 And the light shines in the darkness, and the darkness did not comprehend it. [31] 
- John 1:1-5 (NKJV)
How were things made?  By the Word of the Lord [Christ] 
4 For the word of the LORD is right, and all His work is done in truth.  5 He loves righteousness and justice; the earth is full of the goodness of the LORD.  6 By the word of the LORD the heavens were made, and all the host of them by the breath of His mouth.  7 He gathers the waters of the sea together as a heap; He lays up the deep in storehouses. 
8 Let all the earth fear the LORD; Let all the inhabitants of the world stand in awe of Him.  9 For He spoke, and it was done; He commanded, and it stood fast. 
10 The LORD brings the counsel of the nations to nothing; He makes the plans of the peoples of no effect.  11 The counsel of the LORD stands forever, The plans of His heart to all generations.  12 Blessed is the nation whose God is the LORD, The people He has chosen as His own inheritance. 
13 The LORD looks from heaven; He sees all the sons of men.  14 From the place of His dwelling He looks   On all the inhabitants of the earth; 15 He fashions their hearts individually; He considers all their works. [31] 
- Psalm 33:4-13 (NKJV)
The Word of God is responsible for creation
5 For this they willfully forget: that by the word of God the heavens were of old, and the earth standing out of water and in the water, 6 by which the world that then existed perished, being flooded with water.  7 But the heavens and the earth which are now preserved by the same word, are reserved for fire until the day of judgment and perdition of ungodly men. [31] 
- 2 Peter 3:5-7 (NKJV)
Is it obvious that God created the world?  Yes 
19 because what may be known of God is manifest in them, for God has shown it to them.  20 For since the creation of the world His invisible attributes are clearly seen, being understood by the things that are made, even His eternal power and Godhead, so that they are without excuse, 21 because, although they knew God, they did not glorify Him as God, nor were thankful, but became futile in their thoughts, and their foolish hearts were darkened. [31] 
- Romans 1:19-21 (NKJV)
What is The Beginning?  Christ, as part of the Trinity
 “And to the angel of the church of the Laodiceans write, ‘These things says the Amen, the Faithful and True Witness, the Beginning of the creation of God: [31] 
- Revelation 3:14 (NKJV)
The Beginning
We have seen that the triune God—Father, Son and Spirit—is The Beginning, and that Christ is the creative force, the sustaining, force, the glue of creation, and the source of life.  But what does this have to do with Quantum Mechanics.  Recall that the standard model is comprised of bosons, leptons, and quarks.  Quarks, which are fermions, are bound together by gluons, which are bosons.  Quarks and gluons form nucleons, and nucleons bound together by gluons form the nuclei of atoms.
The electron, which is a fermion, is bound to the nucleus by photons, which are bosons.  All of this stuff together forms atoms.  Atoms form molecules.  Molecules form objects.
Everything that we can see, from the most distant stars to the girl next door, or this page you are staring at, and yourself as well, are made up from a mere 3 fermions and 9 bosons.  The 3 fermions are Up-quark, Down-quark and the electron.  The 9 bosons are 8 gluons and 1 photon.
In The Beginning there was God—Father, Son and Spirit (John 1:1-3).  There was a dense mass of quantum matter and anti-matter, so dense that the universe was not transparent.  Matter and Anti-matter canceled each other out, and there was no force acting on this matter (and anti-matter) to bond quarks or leptons or to cause nucleosynthesis.  There was nothing but this dense ‘cloud’ of darkness.  The universe—the way we understand presently—commenced in perfect symmetry.  Void and formless is exactly what it was.
Returning to John 1
What did the Apostle John mean by, “In the beginning was the Word”? Pretty much every theologian accepts that the Word is Christ.  When differences arise, they center on “when is the beginning”?
There are two major views here.  Some say that the beginning refers to the beginning of Christ’s ministry—when He was baptized.  Jehovah’s Witnesses take this stance, for example.  Others say this refers to the beginning of creation.
If we take a look at what John wrote in the original Greek—or at least what has been handed down as what he wrote—the meaning of the beginning is pretty clear.  John 1:1 in the Greek is rendered:
“Ἐν ἀρχῇ ἦν ὁ λόγος, καὶ ὁ λόγος ἦν πρὸς τὸν θεόν, καὶ θεὸς ἦν ὁ λόγος.”
The key part of the sentence and word structure is, “Ἐν ἀρχῇ”.  There are two ways to write “in the beginning”, one as John wrote it, and the other as, “Ἐν ῇ ἀρχῇ” with the definite article ῇ or “the”.  When the definite article is left out by the writer, it is not because he does not know how to spell—like me.  It is because the writer left it out intentionally to describe something about the noun “beginning” that most people miss.  When the writer uses “ἀρχῇ” without the definite article for “the”, he is expressing the noun in the absolute sense.  “Ἐν ἀρχῇ” is literally “In beginning”, and John meant this in the absolute sense, or in the absolute beginning—the Creation Beginning!
Day 1
Then something happened that caused a shift.  The war between matter and anti-matter ended, and only the smallest quantum particles remained: all the gluons, the photon, the Up and Down quarks, the electron and its e-neutrino.  Suddenly there was room for particles to travel freely—the mass became less dense—and there was an excess of regular matter that had survived.  Atomic nuclei began to form.  Then atoms (helium, hydrogen, and oxygen).  Then hydrogen and oxygen bonded in such a way that water formed, and other atoms bonded into the minerals for creating earth were formed.
Then God said “let there be light”.  With the space to move freely, the photon produced the energy that set the entire universe ablaze, that gave particles the ability to bond and which supplied particles and the atoms they formed with an unending source of fuel.  Fuel to travel, to engage, to make objects, stars and planets and eventually an even greater thing: that which is generally known as a living creature.  Cells were made from atoms, cells that fed and reproduced and were autonomous and were able to capture the Great Light; and instead of degenerating it into kinetic energy or heat, were able to transform it into a chemical or electrical equivalent: the miracle of life.
Now all the atoms required for making the sun, moon, and stars—as well as water and earth—were available.  Plant life and animal life could now be formed.  Time began!
There was no space-time in The Beginning.  Now God took ‘nothing’ (matter and anti-matter) and made land and water, time commenced: “And there was evening and there was morning, one day.” [1] (Genesis 1:5)  And during that one day, God created everything required to separate water, to make vegetation, and to create life—all the atomic building blocks and energy.  But God waited and sequentially built His creation.  He could have done it all at one time.  But He didn’t.
Day 2
On the second day, God divided the aquatic body into lower waters and higher waters, separated by the firmament called the heavens.  In the development of the material realm, the first breach in symmetry was the matter-antimatter manifestation.  In Genesis 1 only the lower aquatic body produces the rest of observable creation.  In the material realm, only the regular side of the matter-antimatter couple is to form observable space-time.
Day 3
On the third day waters collect and form solid ground—physics speaks of this as polarization.  Vegetation sprouted from the earth.
Day 4
On the fourth day the creation command is repeated, but in plural: let there be lights!  Where the first ‘let there be light’ resulted in the making of the individual quantum particle (photon), on the fourth day their application is commanded: be plural (the great lights) and shine on the earth!
Day 5
On the fifth day, the phrase ‘soul of life’ is introduced.  Matter has become living.  Electromagnetic economy is conducted.  Living aquatic creatures and birds form from small to large.
Day 6
On the sixth day, creation is completed with the earth bringing forth living land creatures and God creating man.
All organisms (including plants) that are alive today exist between the day 4 and day 6, and the non-human organisms cannot imagine that a realm of intelligent mind exists, let alone ponder what it is like to have a human mind. 
The creation week is a multi-dimensional interlaced fractal, but we will not burden the reader with all that is there to find.  Suffice to say that the creation-fractal is deliciously complex.  Every day has its dark part and its light part.  But the whole week is self-similar to one day; also having a dark part (first three days) and a light part (latter three days).  This teaches us the peculiar idea that the numbers 1 and 7 are self-similar.
Conclusion
The rub of Genesis one is not that God created all things in six literal days, although that is important.  The key to Genesis one—and the rest of Scripture—is that it points to Christ.  He is the creative force, the sustaining force, the glue of creation, and the source of life.  Understanding Christ is the means of understanding life and the universe.
If scientist were ever to complete their theory of quantum mechanics and chaos theory, they would find Christ at the end of their search.  The Word of God explains everything we know and need to know, including chaos theory, quantum mechanics, number theory, psychology… and yes, theology.  All science, literature, etc. lead to the Creator—Jesus Christ.  Of course, that will not happen in this fallen world, so we must be content with what we have: Quantum Phaith!
I recognize that this book is filled with a lot of really weird stuff.  Now that you are familiar with the Inductive Method of Bible study, examine scripture for yourself.  When I began unraveling Genesis 1, I was ‘full’ of presuppositions that I had to put aside, so that the Scripture could speak for itself.  I discovered a lot of weirdness—stuff had not seen before; stuff that I had to pray about a lot.  I did not think I would ever finish this book—and maybe I have not—but I had to have Quantum Faith!
With what little faith you can muster—even as tiny as a quantum particle—let Christ to be the Lord of your life, and your perception of the universe with change.
