Where did all the Teaching go?
In a recent article, “Where did all the thinking go?”, I called attention to a decline in critical thinking skills in the U.S., and identified some possible reasons for the process. In this article I hope to address a major root cause for this “thought cancer.”
“Thought cancer” may sound a little strong, but like actual malignancies in our bodies, it can destroy the function of the organ it has infested. When that happens, we depend on others to think for us, while we forget how to do it ourselves. Now, some may view this critical thinking decline as a government conspiracy designed to create a dependence upon political parties and interest groups to tell us what to think. However, I believe the issue is fundamentally linked to paradigm shift in teaching in the U.S.
The Testing Paradigm
“Accountability makes no sense when it undermines the larger goals of education.” 
― Diane Ravitch, The Death and Life of the Great American School System: How Testing and Choice Are Undermining Education
To catch up with educational systems that were producing students with high standardized scores, especially when compared with the U.S., curriculums in our country—whether good or bad—shifted from teaching critical thinking to scoring higher on standardize tests.
I imagine few of you remember the era before standardized testing performance became the focal point of our educational system. I confess that I do not remember the objectives of the curriculums I underwent in my K-12 student career—I only know that standardized test performance was not high on the list, if it was there at all. I was aware, however, that other school systems (city, county, and state-wide) were obviously more focused on standard test scores on it that I was exposed to, simply by examining my percentile of performance.
Now, there is nothing wrong with helping our students perform better on standardized tests, but not to the extent where it may take the place of critical thinking. I recently went through the Emergency Medical Technician (EMT) certification program at Pike’s Peak Community College (PPCC). I was in a section that was taught by the “toughest” instructor in the program, or so I was told. She drilled us on critical thinking, often causing us to feel like the halfwits we probably were. The culmination of the program was the standardized National Registry Emergency Medical Technician (NREMT) cognitive exam, a standardized exam measuring the knowledge of emergency medicine required for EMTs. 
The “Right” Objective
“There is something deeply hypocritical in a society that holds an inner-city child only eight years old ‘accountable’ for her performance on a high-stakes standardized exam but does not hold the high officials of our government accountable for robbing her of what they gave their own kids six or seven years before.” 
― Jonathan Kozol, The Shame of the Nation: The Restoration of Apartheid Schooling in America 
According to the National Registry’s most recent published data from 2014, on a national average, approximately 33 percent of EMTs fail the test on the first try and 23 percent of paramedics fail on their first try. Student of my instructor have a first try passing rate greater than 97%. I passed on my first try, demonstrating an adequate understanding of EMT-level medical knowledge in 44 minutes on this 2-hour exam. We had never talked about how to take or pass the standardized exam. We did, however, drill repeatedly on critical thinking.
As a nation, trying to catch up with our international neighbors may be commendable but is literally impossible! Without elaboration, U.S. classrooms are not generally homogeneous, are relatively large, and spend less time on academics when compared with other nations. These (and others) factor contribute to the poor showing of U.S. mathematics and science programs. According to U.S. News and World Report, in 2012, the U.S. is ranked 33rd in mathematics, only 19 points above the average—for science the U.S. is ranked 23rd. There was relatively no improvement when compared with the year 2000.
In my years of working with industry (over 20 years in defense, space, aerospace, insurance, and banking), I have never taken a standardized test! Yet, I have been “forced” to teach new analysts, scientists, and engineers that choice “C” is not always the correct response to a question—the answer is usual a combination of “A through Z”, plus some quantum physics and fuzzy logic. 
Conclusion
I could write an article with names and faces and places (I know that is too many conjunctions), but suffice it to say, we are focused on the wrong thing in education. Granted there are exceptions, like school programs in Minnesota, we have not fixed anything in education, and perhaps created more problems. Also, we have a system where teachers are overworked, underpaid, and lack the authority to follow their instructive instincts, all of which are not the fault of teachers. School administrations at every level have put teachers between a rock and a hard place, and they have become slaves to an infeasible system of education.
So where did all the thinking go? It followed the teaching!