Why Stand? Many have Fallen!
This is not a political article or statement. Substitute your own colors and you will find that it is just patriotism—whether you are a citizen of Iran, Great Britain, Cambodia, Brazil, Mexico, Canada, Germany, or even North Korea. Why stand? 
For the Fallen
Don’t stand because of political parties, ideologies, or elected official. Stand for the fallen. I can sit here in relative safety and write because Harold Witzke took a sniper bullet in Kuwait City that left him lifeless, along with 294 other Americans who spilled their blood for our freedom during that war.  I had trained so many of the soldiers that met and defeated the Republican Guard that my heart was broken when I heard that CPL James McCoy had died at the Battle of 73 Easting, just as it had been when I wrote a letter to Mr. and Mrs. Schneider regarding their son. 
<iframe title="AZCENTRAL - Embed Player" width="540" height="304" frameborder="0" scrolling="no" allowfullscreen="true" marginheight="0" marginwidth="0" src=//www.azcentral.com/videos/embed/84921758/?fullsite=true></iframe>
Ron White, an Afghanistan war veteran, writes the names of fallen soldiers of the war in the order they died from memory. Video by Thomas Hawtorne | azcentral.com
For it Stands
In “Defence of Fort M’Henry”, the 35-year-old lawyer and amateur poet Francis Scott Key, penned a poem on September 14, 1814, after witnessing the bombardment of Fort McHenry by British ships of the Royal Navy in Baltimore Harbor during the Battle of Baltimore in the War of 1812. In the aftermath, it stood.

On December 7, 1941, the Japanese Royal Navy conducted a surprise attack on the U.S. Naval Base at Pearl Harbor. Though 2,403 Americans were killed and 1,178 others were wounded, it stood.

On September 11, 2001, others tried to take it down, we suffered great loss and a changed nation. Although the attacks killed 2,996 people and injured over 6,000 others, it still stood.

Stand for Unity
Do not stand because of a political party. Do not stand because of an elected official. Do not stand because you have faced disappointments. Do not stand because you read this article. If you are not standing for any of these reasons, then you are letting the reasons rob you of your pride and your self-respect. These things are not worth the effort.

Stand because you are proud to do so. Stand because only YOUR unselfish act can bring unity.
Who else Stands?
I have been to the World War II Memorial in New Delhi, India (we may not have achieved victory in the Pacific without them). The Indians I saw there stood proudly, even though many looked like they did not know where their next meal would come from. Australia has a Wall of Remembrance—I would like to see it. I would like to stand with those who stand there.

Here’s to the red of it — 
There’s not a thread of it,
No, nor a shred of it
In all the spread of it
	From foot to head.
But heroes bled for it,
Faced steel and lead for it,
Precious blood shed for it,
	Bathing it red!

Here’s to the white of it —
Thrilled by the sight of it,
Who knows the right of it
But feels the might of it
	Through day and night?
Womanhood’s care for it
Made manhood dare for it,
Purity’s prayer for it
	Keeps it so white!

Here’s to the blue of it —
Beauteous view of it,
Heavenly hue of it,
Star-spangled dew of it
	Constant and true;
Diadems gleam for it,
States stand supreme for it,
Liberty’s beam for it
	Brightens the blue!

Here’s to the whole of it —
Star, stripes and pole of it,
Body and soul of it,
O, and the roll of it,
	Sun shining through;
Hearts in accord for it
Swear by the sword for it,
Thanking the Lord for it,
	Red, White and Blue!