INDIAN PHILOSOPHY PART II


CHAPTER VII 


THE ETHICAL IDEALISM OF EARLY 
BUDDHISM 

Introduction — The evolution of Buddhist thought — Literature of early 
Buddhism — The three Pitakas — Questions of King Milinda— Visud- 
dhimagga — Life and personality of Buddha — Conditions of the time — 
The world of thought — The futility of metaphysics — The state of 
religion — Moral life — Ethics independent of metaphysics and theology 
— The positivist method of Buddha — His rationalism — Religion 
within the bounds of reason — Buddhism and the Upanisads — The 
four truths — The first truth of suffering — Is Buddhism pessimistic ? — 
The second truth of the causes of suffering — Impermanence of things 
Ignorance — The dynamic conception of reality — Bergson — Identity 
of objects and continuity of process — Causation — Impermanence and 
momentariness — The world order — Being and becoming in the Upani- 
sads and early Buddhism — Aristotle, Kant and Bergson— Sariikara 
on the ksanikavada — The nature of becoming — Is it objective or 
only subjective ? — External reality — Body and mind — The empirical 
individual — Nairatmyavada — Nature of the Atman — Nagasena s 
theory of the soul — Its resemblance to Hume’s — The nature of the 
subject— § amkara and Kant — Buddhist psychology — Its relation to 
modern psychology — Sense perception — Affection, will and know- 
ledge — -Association — Duration of mental states — Subconsciousness 
Rebirth — Pratltyasamutpada — Nidanas — Avidya and the other links 
in the chain — The place of avidya in Buddha’s metaphysics The 
ethics of Buddhism — -Its psychological basis — Analysis of the act 
Good and evil— The middle path — The eightfold way— Buddhist 
Dhyana and the Yoga philosophy — The ten fetters — The Arhat 
Virtues and vices — The motive of moral life — The inwardness of 
Buddhist morality — The charge of intellectualism The complaint 
of asceticism — The order of mendicants — Sangha Buddha s attitude 
to caste and social reform — The authority of the Vedas The ethical 
significance of Karma — Karma and freedom Rebirth Its mechanism 
— Nirvana— Its nature and varieties — The Nirvana of Buddhism and 
the Moksa of the Upanisads— God in early Buddhism— The criticism 
of the traditional proofs for the existence of God — The absolutist 
implications of Buddhist metaphysics— The deification of Buddha— 
Compromises with popular religion— Buddhist theory of knowledge— 
Buddha's pragmatic agnosticism — Buddha s silence on metaphysical 
problems— Kant and Buddha— The inevitability of metaphysics— 
The unity of thought between Buddhism and the Upanisads— 
Buddhism and the Samkhya theory — Success of Buddhism. 

341 



342 


INDIAN PHILOSOPHY 


I 

Early Buddhism 

There is no question that the system of early Buddhism 
is one of the mos* original which the history of philosophy 
presents. In its fundamental ideas and essential spirit it 
approximates remarkably to the advanced scientific thought 
of the nineteenth century. The modern pessimistic philo- 
sophy of Germany, that of Schopenhauer and Hartmann, is 
only a revised version of ancient Buddhism. It is some- 
times said to be “ little more than Buddhism vulgarised.” 
As far as the dynamic conception of reality is concerned, 
Buddhism is a splendid prophecy of the creative evolu- 
tionism of Bergson. Early Buddhism suggests the outline 
of a philosophy suited to the practical wants of the present 
day and helpful in reconciling the conflict between faith and 
science. This will be clearly seen if we confine our atten- 
tion to the leading principles of early Buddhism and do 
not emphasise the varying phases of its growth and the 
mythical legends which have crystailised round the primi- 
tive teaching and the founder, Buddha himself. 


II 

Evolution of Buddhist Thought 

Buddhist thought even in India has an evolution of 
over a thousand years to show. As Rhys Davids observes : 
“ Buddhism varies, through slight degrees, as the centuries 
pass by in almost every book.” In the second century 
after Buddha’s death, no less than eighteen varieties of 
Buddhistic doctrine can be traced . 1 In the realm of ideas, 
life means change. It is not possible for us to thrust the 
whole development into this era. While early Buddhism 
and the Hlnayana and the Mahayana forms of it belong to 
this period, the four schools of Buddhistic thought take 


1 Rhys Davids : J.P.A.S., 1S91, "The Sects of the Buddhists." 



ETHICAL IDEALISM OF BUDDHISM 343 


us beyond it. We propose, however, to refer to the 
Buddhistic schools in treating of this period, since towards 
the end of it they were fairly well developed. 


Ill 

Literature 

For an account of early Buddhism we have to depend 
on the Pitakas, or the Baskets of the Law. The views set 
forth in them, if not the actual doctrine taught by Buddha 
himself, are yet the nearest approximation to it we possess. 
They represent what early Indian Buddhists believed to 
be the sayings and doings of their . master. We have in 
them an account of the beliefs about Buddha and his 
teaching prevalent at the time when the pitakas were 
compiled and written down. They were probably compiled 
and completed before 241 b.c., when the third Council was 
held. They are undoubtedly the earliest and most authori- 
tative account of Buddha’s teaching now in existence. 

According to the late traditions of Buddhism, a short 
time after Gautama’s death, or after “the lamp of wisdom 
had been blown out by the wind of impermanence,” disputes 
arose among the followers of Buddha about certain matters 
of doctrine. To settle them a council was called together 
at Rajagrha, near Magadha. When the whole order was 
assembled, Kdsyapa, the most learned of Buddha’s dis- 
ciples, was asked to recite the metaphysical views set 
forth in the Abhidhammapitaka. Updli, the oldest disciple 
of Buddha then living, was called upon to repeat the laws 
and rules of discipline which are found in the Vinayapitaka. 
Lastly, Ananda, Buddha’s favourite disciple, was asked to 
repeat the Suttapitaka, containing the stories and parables 
told by Buddha during his preaching tour. For a long 
time the teaching of Buddha was transmitted through the 
regular succession of teachers and disciples, and was reduced 
to writing only in 80 B.C., in the reign of King V attagamani. 
in Ceylon. “ The text of the three pitakas and the com- 
mentary thereon did the most wise bhiksus hand down 
in former times orally, but since they saw that the people 



344 INDIAN PHILOSOPHY 

were falling away (from the orthodox teaching) the bhikshus 
met together, and in order that the true doctrines might 
endure, they wrote them down in books.” 1 The Pali canon 
has the three divisions of (i) Sutta or tales, (2) Vinaya or 
discipline, (3) Abhidhamma or doctrine. The first Sutta 
pitaka has five divisions, called Nikayas. The first four of 
these consists of Suttas or lectures mainly by Buddha in the 
form of speeches or dialogues. There is no difference in the 
doctrines they inculcate. 2 About this basket of discourses 
or Sutta pitaka as a whole, Rhys Davids says : “In depth of 
philosophic insight, in the method of Socratic questioning 
often adopted, in the earnest and elevated tone of the whole, 
in the evidence they afford of the most cultured thought of 
the day, these discourses constantly remind the reader of the 
dialogues of Plato. ... It is quite inevitable that as soon 

1 Mahavamsa, chap, xxxiil. 

* The five divisions are the following : — 

(a) Dfgha Nikaya is the collection of long lectures containing thirty-four 
suttas, each dealing with one or more points of Buddhistic doctrine. The 
first of them is Brahmajdla sutta, the second Sdmahhaphala sutta (on the 
reward of asceticism). Ambatfha sutta speaks of Buddha’s attitude to caste. 
Kutadanta sutta speaks of the relation of Brahmanism and Buddhism. 
Tevijja sutta contrasts the Brahmin culture with Buddhist ideals. Mahani- 
ddna sutta speaks of causation. Sigalovdda sutta speaks of the duties of 
the Buddhist layman. Mahdparimbbdna sutta gives an account of the 
last days of Buddha. 

( b ) The Majjhima Nikaya is the collection of lectures of middle length, 
about 152 sermons and dialogues dealing with all points of Buddhist religion. 

( c ) Samyutta Nikaya is the collection of combined lectures. It contains 
the famous Dhammachakkapavattana sutta, “ lecture on setting in motion 
the wheel of the law.” It is usually called the sermon of Benares, and is 
also found in the Vinayapifaka. 

(d) Anguttara Nikaya has over 2,300 suttas in eleven sections, so arranged 
that in the first are treated objects of one kind, in the second those of which 
there are two kinds, and so on 

(e) Khuddaka Nikaya is the collection of small pieces. It has fifteen 
divisions: (1) Khuddakapatha, (2) Dhammapada, (3) Udana, (4) IUvutiaha, 
(5) Suttanipata, (G) Vimanavatthu, (7) Petavatthu, (8) Theragathd, (9) Therl- 
gdthd, (10) Jdtaka, (11) Niddesa, (12) Patisambhiddmagga, (13) Apaddna, (14) 
Buddhavamsa, (15) Cariyd pitaka. The Theragatha and Therlgatha are of 
great poetic merit and human interest. Their songs of deliverance and 
joy are ascribed to members of the Sangha who have attained to arhatid, 
the perfect peace and delight beyond words, in the lifetime of Gautama. 
The J atakas relate the legendary histories of the previous births of Gautama, 
and are very valuable to the student of folklore. Dhammapada (S.B.E., 
vol. x) contains the gist of the essential principles of Buddha’s doctrine. 
Those who have not the patience and the ability to master the three pifakas 
resort to this summary of Buddhist ethics. 



ETHICAL IDEALISM OF BUDDHISM 345 

as it is properly translated and understood, this collection 
of the dialogues of Gautama will come to be placed, in 
our schools of philosophy and history, on a level with the 
dialogues of Plato.” 

The Vmayapitaka, which deals with ecclesiastical dis- 
cipline and prescribes rules and regulations to govern the 
lives of the monks, has three main divisions, two of which 
are subdivided : (i) Suttavibhanga, divided into (a) Parajika, 
(b) Pacittiya. (2) Khandaka divided into ( a ) Mahavagga, 
(b) Cullavagga. (3) Parivara, The third Abhidhammapitaka ' 
deals with psychological ethics and, incidentally, metaphysics 
and philosophy, and has seven sub-divisions : (1) Dhamma 
Sangani, ascribed to the first half or the middle of the 
fourth century b.c. ; (2) Vibhanga ; (3) Kathavattu ; 

(4) Puggalapannatti ; (5) Dhatu ; (6) Yamaka; and (7) Pat. 
thana. This is the Pali canon, setting forth the doctrines 
known as the Theravada, since they were collected at the 
first Council by the Theras or the Elders. 2 

Sometimes Milinda Panha, or Questions of King Milinda, l 
a dialogue between the Buddhist teacher and acute dialec- 
tician Nagasena and the Greek king Menander, who ruled 
over the Indus territory and the valley of the Ganges from 
about 125 to 95 B.C., is also included in the Pali canon, as in 
Siam. This work is in great use in Ceylon, where it is the 
standard authority. It was written sometime about or after 
the beginning of the Christian era. We need not consider 
this book to be the epitome of the teaching of Buddha. The 
discussion seems to have taken place some 400 years after 
Buddha’s death, and represents to us a form of Buddhism 
which came into vogue much later than the age of Buddha. 
The Questions of King Milinda, according to Rhys Davids, 
is “ the masterpiece of Indian prose, and indeed the best 
book of its class, from a literary point of view, that had 
been produced in any country.” Buddhaghosa considers 
it to be the most authoritative work after the Pali pitakas.t 
While the Pali pi takas may be substantially identical with 
the teaching of Buddha, in the Questions of Milinda we 

■ Abhidhamma is ge-erally translated " metaphysics ” ; Doctrine brings 
out the Pali sense better. * See Oidenberg : Dipavatiisa, p. 37. 

i S.B.E., vols. ixxv. and xxxvi. 4 S.B.E., xxxv., p. xvi. 



346 INDIAN PHILOSOPHY 

seem to get a more negative interpretation of the Buddhist 
teaching. Nagasena seems to commit Buddha to a negative 
dogmatism which denies soul, God and a future for the 
liberated. He is a thoroughgoing rationalist, who adopted 
the scientific method rigorously and tore off the screen 
of make-believe which pious hands had woven round the 
image of truth to disguise its uglier aspects. Realising 
that the seeker of truth must at least be truthful, he held 
that the make-believe of religion was no escape for the 
sufferings of mankind. On obviously incomplete data 
Buddha might have withheld judgment. Nagasena doubted 
the caution of Buddha and became actively negative. To 
him lack of evidence for an opinion was a sufficient reason 
for disbelieving it. For believing on incomplete evidence 
is not only a blunder but a crime. Suspended judgment 
was Buddha’s attitude ; reckless repudiation was Nagasena’s 
amendment. In working out with remorseless logic the 
consequences of Buddha’s ideas, he has unwittingly revealed 
their inadequacy. 

Buddhaghosa’s Visuddhimagga is a later work (a.d. 400) 
composed by a Brahmin convert to Buddhism. It 
sets forth the Hinayana arhat ideal and develops the 
old doctrine. Buddhaghosa is the first Buddhist com- 
mentator. His AtthasalinI is a valuable commentary on 
Dhammasangani. The Theravada did not develop much after 
Buddhaghosa’s time. Other Pali works of great historical, 
though not of philosophical, importance are the Dipavamsa 
(fourth century A.D.) and the Mahavamsa (fifth century A.D.). 
Our account of early Buddhism in this chapter will be con- 
fined mainly to the pitakas and the orthodox com- 
mentaries. The Questions of King Milinda will also be 
used, but with reservation. Even when later works are 
made use of, we shall take care that no idea is introduced 
which is not contained in the earlier texts. 

IV 

Buddha's Life and Personality 

When we pass from the Upanisads to early Buddhism, 
we pass from a work of many minds to the considered 



ETHICAL IDEALISM OF BUDDHISM 017 


creed of a single individual. In the Upanisads we have 
an amazing study of an atmosphere, in Buddhism the con- 
crete embodiment of thought in the life of a man. This 
unity of thought and life worked wonderfully on the world 
of the time. The singular personality and life of Buddha 
had much to do with the success of early Buddhism. 

Any man with imagination will be struck with amaze- 
ment when he finds that six centuries before Christ there 
lived in India a prince second to none before him or after 
in spiritual detachment, lofty idealism, nobility of life and 
love for humanity. The name of “ Buddha,” the knower, 
the enlightened, is that by which Gautama, the wandering 
preacher, is known to his disciples and through them to 
the world. 1 He was born circa 567 b.c. His own name 
is Siddhartha, or he who has accomplished his aim ; his 
family name Gautama, his father’s name ^uddhodana, and 
mother’s Maya. He was the heir to the Sakya kingdom, 
and was brought up in Kapilavastu, the capital of the 
fsakyas, by the second wife of Suddhodana, Mahayapati, 
Gautama’s mother having died seven days after his birth. 
It is said that he married his cousin Yasodhara, and had 
a son, by name Rahula, who became later his disciple. 
Early enough the burden and mystery of this unintelligible 
world pressed upon him with great force. He was much 
disturbed by the transience and uncertainty of life, and 
became keenly conscious of the black depths in which 
multitudes of human beings perish in darkness and sin. 
The story of the four signs which Gautama met on the 
road of Kapilavastu, the aged man bowed down by years, 
the sick man scorched by fever, the corpse followed by 
mourners weeping and tearing their hair and the mendicant 
friar, points the moral that the misery of the world left a 
sting on his sensitive nature.* The sights of suffering were 

1 Buddha means the enlightener, and is a common name applied to many 
in India. It is a term like Ch ist which means the anointed. 

a The force of fatality in a similar manner stirred George Sand to reflect 
on the sorrow' of the world. " When the sadness, the want, the hopelessness, 
the vice of which haman society is full, rose up before me, when my reflections 
were no longer bent upon my proper destiny, but upon that of the world of 
which I was but an atom, my personal despair extended itself to all creation, 
and the law of fatality arose before me in such appalling aspect that my 

12 


VOL. I 



348 


INDIAN PHILOSOPHY 


enough to awaken in him a consciousness of the age-long 
burden that bears hardest on the innocent and threatens 
with shipwreck even the best endeavours of man. Indi- 
vidual instances of suffering to Buddha were illustrations of 
a universal problem. All that was fixed in him was shaken 
and he trembled at life. 

Impressed by the emptiness of the things of sense, he 
renounced the ease, power and wealth of the palace to 
meditate on the eternal, and open for his fellowmen an 
escape from the meanness of life and the illusions of the 
flesh. In those days seekers after truth, haunted and 
obsessed by mental unrest, used to become wandering 
hermits. The seeker for light must begin his search by a 
repudiation of the good things of the world. In con- 
formity with the ancient custom Buddha left his home 
and adopted the ascetic’s life. He cast off his dignity, 
put on the yellow robe and begged for his bread, wandering 
up and down the streets of the world seeking for light and 
peace. He made this great renunciation at the age of 
twenty-nine . 1 He tried to find spiritual rest by philo- 
sophic thought, and spent some time voyaging through 
strange seas of thought alone, but not with much success. 
Subtle dialectics are no cure for mental unrest. The other 
means of escape was through bodily austerities. Gautama 
went with five faithful friends to a solitary spot in the 
jungles of Uruvela and there gave himself up to fasting 
and other bodily mortifications of the most severe type, 
seeking peace of soul through the fervour of asceticism. 
He could not gain any solace from it, for the truth was as 
far off as ever. He was grow'ing desperate, and one night 
came very near dying, having fainted from fatigue and 
sheer starvation. Truth was yet a problem and life an 
interrogation. 


reason was shaken by it.” Quoted by W. S. Lilly : Many Mansions. See 
also Mahapadanasuttunta ; Khys Davids : Dialogues of Buddha, vol. ii. 

1 The popular story describes the act with great force. It is said that 
he aiose at midnight, went to the door of his wife’s chamber, and saw her 
sleep ng resting one hand on her baby’s head. He had wished to take 
his son in his arms for a last emb ace, but the fear of waking the young 
mother withheld him. He turned away and fled into the night in search 
for light. 



ETHICAL IDEALISM OF BUDDHISM 349 

After full six years of intense ascetic discipline Buddha 
became convinced of the futility of the method. The 
emptiness of wealth, the wisdom of the schools and the 
austerity of asceticism were all weighed in the balance and 
found wanting. With a body purified by abstinence, a 
mind refined by humility and a heart attuned by solitude, 
he sought wisdom in the wilderness. He turned to God’s 
creation in the world if haply he could learn the truth 
from the beauty of the dawn, the glory of the sun and the 
wealth of nature and life. He took to meditation and 
prayer. Legendary accounts speak of the doings of Mara 
to distract Buddha’s attention and turn him from his pur- 
pose, now by violent assaults, now by tempting allure- 
ments. Mara did not succeed. Seated under the “ botree ” 
on a bed of grass, Gautama remained facing the east, 
steadfast and immovable, with his mind fixed to a purpose — 
“ Never from this seat will I stir until I have attained 
the supreme and absolute wisdom.” He spent seven 
weeks under the tree. “ When the mind grapples with a 
great and intricate problem, it makes its advances, it 
secures its positions step by step, with but little realisation 
of the gains it has made, until suddenly, with an effect 
of abrupt illumination, it realises its victory. So it would 
seem it happened to Gautama.” 1 In one of his deeply 
meditative moods, while resting under the tree, to which 
his devoted followers gave the name of Bodhinanda, or 
scat of intelligence, a new light broke upon his mind. 
The object of his quest was in his possession. 

When he found enlightenment after years of steady 
search and meditation, he felt charged with the mission to 
announce to the doomed multitudes the way to everlasting 
felicity. He preached the gospel of the four Aryan truths 
and the eightfold path to the distracted world. Without 
troubling himself with the subtleties of metaphysics, he 
preached the ethical way, that he might save the masses 
of men living in sin and infamy. The serenity and gentle- 
ness of his face, the beauty and dignity of his life, the 
earnestness and enthusiasm of his love, the wisdom and the 
eloquence of his message won the hearts of men and women 
* Wells : The Outline of History, p. 207. 



350 INDIAN PHILOSOPHY 

alike. For his first pupils he selected the five ascetic 
friends of his. To them he uttered his first sermon on 
“ Dharmacakrapravartana,” or “ Setting in motion the 
Wheel of the Law.” They accepted his teaching and were 
duly ordained the first members of the Buddhist order 
or Sahglia. The number of disciples gradually increased. 
Missionaries were sent in all directions to teach the new 
dharma. The earliest converts and the most renowned 
were Sariputta and Mogallana, ascetics of Rajagrha, who 
received the truth from Assaji, one of the five original 
disciples. Buddha personally admitted them into the 
order. Other famous disciples who fill a large place in the 
early chronicles of Buddhism were Upa.fi, who recited the 
text of the Vinaya at the first council after the death of 
Buddha ; Kasyapa, the president of the Council, an im- 
portant Buddhist of the times, since it is said for his 
coming the cremation of Buddha’s body was delayed ; and 
Ananda, Buddha’s cousin and favourite pupil, who watched 
Buddha with tender feeling and great care and was nearest 
to him when he died. Thousands enrolled themselves 
among his adherents. A number of Brahmin teachers 
became converts to Buddhism. When Buddha visited his 
father's court twelve years after he left it, it was only to 
welcome his father and mother, wife and son to his fold. 
Many became lay disciples, and a few women were also 
permitted to form themselves into an order of Buddhist 
nuns. 

When he realised after a missionary life of nearly forty 
years that the time drew near for him to give up his body 
and attain parinirvana , 1 he spent his last hours in giving 
counsels and directions to Ananda and the assembled 
monks. Subhadra, a wandering ascetic, listened to his 
teaching in the last moments, and was the last disciple 
converted by Buddha himself. Buddha asked his disciples 
to state their doubts and difficulties that he might remove 
them. The}' kept silent. Then the Blessed One addressed 
his brethren : “ And now, brethren, I take my leave of 

1 While nirvana is attained and enjoyed during life, parinirvana could 
be realised only at death, with the dissolution of the bodily life. See Pari- 
nibbana Sutta, S.B.E., xi. 



ETHICAL IDEALISM OF BUDDHISM 351 


you : all the constituents of being are transitory : work 
out your salvation with diligence.” 1 He is said to have 
died at the age of eighty. The great Buddha typifies for 
all time the soul of the East with its intense repose, 
dreamy gentleness, tender calm and deep love. He is 
known by several names : Sakyamuni, the sage of Sakyas ; 
Tathagata, he who has arrived at the truth. 

The facts here mentioned may be accepted as authentic. 
There are other incidents mentioned in Lalitavistara 2 3 4 5 * and 
the Jataka tales, more or less legendary. 3 When w 7 e 
remember that the Buddhist works which give an account 
of the life of Buddha are 200 years later than the events 
to which they relate, it will not be a surprise that they 
contain much that is legendary, interwoven with much 
that is authentic.4 The teeming imagination of his fol- 
lowers embellished the story of his life with countless 
legends. The latter do not describe so much the real life 
of the teacher as the way he strikes their heart and 
imagination. 5 

1 Mahaparinibbanasutta, vi. I. Philosophy, according to Plato’s Pheedo 
is the meditation of death. Compare Marcus Aurelius : " All comes to stench 
and refuse at last. . . . All things are alike — familiar, fleeting, foul. . . . 
Anon earth will cover us all ; then earth in its turn will change ; then the 
resultant of the change ; then the resultant of the resultant, and so ad 
infinitum. The billows of change and variation roll apace, and he who 
ponders them will feel contempt for all things mortal.” Quoted in Edwyn 
Bevan’s Hellenism and Christianity, p. 185. 

* Edwin Arnold's Light of Asia. 

3 Nidanakatha, vol. i of the Jatakas and Buddhacarita by Asvaghosa. 

4 The earliest account of the life of Buddha is contained in the Mahapa- 
danasuttanta, Discourse No. 14 of Dlghanikaya. It is said to contain an 
autobiography of Buddha. 

5 While we are willing to admit that much of the popular account of 
Buddha is legendary, we are not so ready to accept the recent view that 
it is all a legend. We refer to the theory started by M. Senart and developed 
by a few others that the whole story of Buddha is a mere myth, added at 
a later date to a religion which had a natural growth. M. Senart maintains 
that we have in the story of Buddha a sun myth mixed with many other 
heterogeneous tendencies. We are not prepared to admit this hypothesis. 
The incidents related in the story of Buddha arc natural and belong to a 

real tradition. We have evidence of the early existence of the books. The 
religion of Buddha cannot be understood unless it is view id as the work 
of a real genius of commanding spiritual fer\our. Even M. Senant 
recognises Bucdha as a te. cher, but Winks a sun myth is woven into 
his life. The central incidents of B. d lia's life, however, cannot be 

thical. 



352 


INDIAN PHILOSOPHY 


V 

The Conditions of the Time 

Every system of thought embodies and reflects the 
tendencies of the time, and cannot be understood unless we 
realise the point of view from which it looked at the world, 
and the habit of thought which made it possible. From 
the unwritten literature later reduced to writing, it is 
possible to infer the condition of the times in which Buddha 
was born. There was not one vast Indian empire, but 
only princes of particular tribes and clans who were trying 
to form small states. Several dialects were in use, though 
Sanskrit was the one sacred language. The Vedas had 
already gained a mysterious sanctity. The customs and 
rules codified later in the laws of Manu were in force, 
though they had not the rigidity which they acquired at 
a later day. The six philosophical schools were not de- 
veloped, though the spirit of speculation which made them 
possible was at work. Moral life suffered, since meta- 
physical subtleties and theological discussions absorbed the 
energies of people. 

A congeries of conflicting theories and guesses, accepted 
by some and denied by others, changing with men, reflecting 
the individual characters, emotions and wishes of their 
authors, filled the air. There were no admitted facts or 
principles which all recognised, but only dissolving views 
and intuitions. Discussions were ripe about the finiteness 
or infiniteness, or neither or both, of the world and the self, 
and the distinction of truth and appearance, the reality of 
a world beyond, the continuance of the soul after death 
and the freedom of the willy Some thinkers identified 
mind and soul, others distinguished them from each other. 
Some held to the supremacy of God, others to that of man. 
Some argued that we know nothing about it ; others flat- 
tered their audiences with mighty hopes and confident 
assurances. Some were busy building elaborate meta- 
physical theories ; others were equally busy demolishing 
them. Many theories independent of the Vedic tradition 
arose. There were the Nigganthas, or fetter-freed; the 



ETHICAL IDEALISM OF BUDDHISM 353 


Samanas, or the ascetics who did not belong to the Brah- 
manical order ; those who sought peace of soul in the renun- 
ciation of the world ; those who practised self-mortification 
denying themselves nourishment for long periods ; those 
who tried spiritual abstraction, the dialecticians, the con- 
troversialists, the materialists and the sceptics, and those 
who are wise in their own conceit, like Saccaka, who had 
the audacity to say, “ I know no Samana, no Brahmana, 
no teacher, no master, no head of a school, even though 
he calls himself the holy supreme Buddha, who, if he face 
me in debate, would not totter, tremble, quake, and from 
whom the sweat would not exude. And if I attacked a 
lifeless pillar with my language, it would totter, tremble, 
quake ; how much more a human being ! ” 1 It was an 
age of speculative chaos, full of inconsistent theologies and 
vague wranglings. 2 

The exuberant fancy of the metaphysically minded 
thus sported with time, space and eternity, and vulgarised 
the noble art of philosophy. Great truths were hidden 
away in the fogs of misty metaphysics. It is those who 
do not see the truth that strike out in the paths of fiction. 
Buddha was struck by the clashing enthusiasms, the dis- 
cordant systems, the ebb and flow of belief, and drew from 
it all his own lesson of the futility of metaphysical think- 
ing. The salvation of the soul does not depend on minute 
distinctions of metaphysical conceits, or the habit of restless 
questioning, or the refinement of reason by the subtle dis- 
putes of sects. The indecision of thought, though it may 
not be taxing to the intellect of man, was injurious to his 
ethical interests. Anarchy in thought was leading to 
anarchy in morals. Therefore Buddha wished to steer 
clear of profitless metaphysical discussions. Whatever meta- 
physics we have in Buddhism is not the original Phamma 
but added to it (abhidhamma 3). Buddhism is essentially 
psychology, logic and ethics, and not metaphysics. ' 

1 Oldenberg : Buddha, p. 70. 

1 The sixty-two theories prevalent at the time of Gautama Buddha, 
mentioned in the Brahmajalasutta, are analysed by Rhys Davids iD his 
American lectures on Buddhism. 

3 Abhi, beyond; dhamma, physics. M-.dhamnas are further analysed 
in Abhidhan.na. Cf. Aristotle. See Atthasalini : Introductory Discourse. 



354 INDIAN PHILOSOPHY 

In the vast continent of India, man’s marvellous capa- 
city for creating gods, the stubborn impulse to polytheism 
had free scope. Gods and ghosts, with powers to injure 
and annoy, as well as to bless and glorify, governed the life 
of the peoples. The multitude esteemed highly the Vedic 
religion, with its creeds and rituals, rites and ceremonies. 
Like the pagans of Europe, who vowed to Mercury the 
tenth part of their goods to be enriched, or a cock to 
iEsculapius in order to be healed, they were busy pleasing 
the gods. Even the one Almighty God of the monotheists 
was a very human sort of god, though of a heroic mould, 
kindly when allowed his own way, angry when thwarted, 
and merciful when his rage had spent itself. The relation 
between the one God and his worshippers was that of 
master and slave. He is a revengeful war-lord, entitled 
to deal with us as He will and bid us stand against the 
foe in battle line. He interfered rather too much with the 
world. Comets were signs of His anger sent to warn a 
sinful world. If the warning is neglected, He may send a 
pestilence to decimate innocent people. Miracles were the 
order of the day. The universal prevalence of law, though 
conceived by the Upanisads, was not yet a living belief. 
Stern monotheism, moreover, resulted in a shifting of 
responsibility to God’s shoulders. If we are bad. He is 
responsible ; if good even He. Either from pure caprice 
or from the desire to avenge the slight offered to Him by 
the sinful act of some remote ancestor, He has doomed the 
majority of mankind to disappointment and suffering. 

Every sin is a violation of God’s law, and the only way 
to please Him is by repentance and rolling in the dust 
Sin is an offence against God, who alone has to be satisfied. 
People were indifferent to the natural consequences of sin, 
though lip allegiance was paid to the law of karma. Over 
all men’s activities there hung the thundercloud of an 
angry God. The result was that religion was distinguished 
from life, and God and the world were opposed. 

The cruel rites with which worship was accompanied 
shocked the conscience of Buddha. There is much damage 
done to the moral nature of man by a superstitious belief 
in God. Many good men do devil’s work in the belief 



ETHICAL IDEALISM OF BUDDHISM 355 


that it has divine sanction. It is difficult to overestimate 
the amount of evil which has resulted in the world from 
a confusion of morality and religion. Abraham is com- 
manded by God to sacrifice his son, and Saul is called 
upon to massacre his captives in cold blood. The views 
which under the name of religion crept into life and had 
so far prevailed as almost to extinguish any spark of 
spiritual vigour cut Buddha to the quick. 

The sceptics on this theory need not be moral. So 
long as morality is based on a divine command miracu- 
lously conveyed, every discovery of science and develop- 
ment of thought would impair the basis of morals. The 
feeble in faith may reject the sanctions of morality. 

■ Buddha, like Lucretius, felt that the world would be 
better for the triumph of natural law over supernaturalism. 
By announcing a religion which proclaimed that each 
man could gain salvation for himself without the mediation 
of priests or reference to gods, he would increase the respect 
for human nature and raise Ihe tone of morality. "It is 
a foolish idea to suppose that another can cause us happi- 
ness or misery.” 1 After Buddha did his work, the belief 
in the permanence and universality of natural law became 
almost an instinct of the Indian mind. 

We shall see later that the world of experience accord- 
ing to Buddha does not require for its explanation any 
God. The law of karma will do. There is the implication 
of the existence of the Highest, but it is not a matter of 
logical demonstration. Buddha endorses the Upanisad 
hypothesis and anticipates St. Paul’s judgment : “ 0 the 
depths of the riches both of the wisdom and knowledge 
of God ! How unsearchable are His judgments, and His 
ways past finding out.” 1 

The Upanisads were a sealed book to the people at 
large. Their teaching was lost in a jumbled chaos of 
puerile superstition. 3 There were people who advocated 

1 Bodhicaryavatara. a Romans xi. 33. 

3 Lalitavistara describes the state of India at the time Buddha preached 
in these words \ “ While at Uruvela J*>akya called to mind all the different 
forms of penances which people in his time were in the habit of submitting 
to and which they thought raised the mind above all carnality. * Here.' 
he thought, 'am I born in the Jambudvlja among people who have no 



356 INDIAN PHILOSOPHY 

tapas to bend the gods to their will. A dialogue of Buddha 
with an ascetic mentions twenty-two methods of self- 
mortification in respect of food and thirteen about clothing 
The beauty of renunciation was eclipsed by the barbarism 
of superstition. Those who attempted to raise their 
souls ran the danger of degrading themselves into beasts. 
The masses of men were addicted to the ceremonies and 
observances prescribed by those who live on food pro- 
vided by the faithful and whom Buddha describes as 
“ tricksters, droners out of holy words for pay, diviners, 
exorcists, ever hungering to add gain to gain.” 1 The 
priest who pretended to be the channel of divine power 
dominated the religion of the country. Buddha has nothing 
but warm admiration for the prophet of the soul, the true 
Brahmin, who was required to say, “ Silver and gold have 
I none.” But when the prophet became a priest, and 
amassed silver and gold, he lost the power and the prestige 
born of spiritual gifts, and could no more say to the lame 
man, “ Rise up and walk.” He ceased to cure the sick by 
initiating them into the life of spirit, but assuming high 
airs, he pretended to be in the confidence of the gods and 
addressed the needy : “ Son, make a sacrifice to God and a 
payment to me, and thy sins will be forgiven thee.” The 
system of salvation by silver could not answer to the deeper 
needs of the human heart. To the mass of men religion 
consisted in regular ceremonial, prayer and penance, puri- 
fications and prohibitions applicable to almost all rela- 
tions of human life. Buddha felt the hollowness of the 

prospect of intellectual redemption, crowded by Tlrthikas, or revealers of 
the truth, with diverse wishes, and at a time when their iaculties are wriggling 
in the grasp of the crocodile of their carnal wants. Stupid men who seek to 
purify their persons by diverse modes of austerity and penance, and inculcate 
the same. Some of them cannot make out their mantras ; some lick 
their hands; some are uncleanly; some have no mantras; some wander 
after different sources ; some adore cows, deer, horses, hogs, monkeys or 
elephants Seated at one place in silence with their legs bent under them, 
some attempt greatness. Some attempt to accomplish their penance by 
inhaling smoke or fire, by gazing at the sun, by performing the five fires, 
resting on one foot or with an arm perpetually uplifted or moving about 
the knees . . . some pride themselves on their saluting Brahma, Indra, Rudra, 
Vi$nu, De\I, Kumara.’ . . 

■ Rhys Davids : Buddhist India, p. 215 ; see also Dialogues 0) the Buddha, 
;. 15. 



ETHICAL IDEALISM OF BUDDHISM 357 


host of beliefs which people were wont to regard as 
articles of faith. He hated that men should play the fool 
for nothing. He raised his voice in indignant protest 
against superstition and unreason and bade his disciples 
cease playing with trifles and realise the spiritual laws of 
the world. He denied the divinity of the gods and under- 
mined the authority of the Vedas. 

Buddha felt most intensely the inevitable defects of an 
age of criticism and enlightenment, when ancient faith was 
undermined and the fancies of theology were disappearing 
like the shapes of a dream. Men’s souls were full of unrest, 
and desolating discord, and those unable to believe were 
looking out for a doctrine. The quest of the age was 
reflected in the spirit of early Buddhism. Buddha laid his 
finger on the heart’s desire for the true, the good and the 
beautiful. 

In the collapse of creeds and the disintegration of 
systems, it was the task of Buddha to provide a firm 
foundation for morality. As in the Greek world the larger 
and more comprehensive metaphysical systems of Plato and 
Aristotle were followed by the ethical speculations of the 
Stoics and the Epicureans, so it happened in ancient India. 
When the foundations of philosophy became shaken, the 
principles of conduct attracted the attention of thinkers. 
If ethics is made to rest on the shifting sands of meta- 
physics or theology, it has an uncertain tenure. Buddha 
wished to build it on the rock of facts. Ancient Buddhism 
resembles positivism in its attempt to shift the centre from 
the worship of God to the service of man. Buddha was 
not so keen about founding a new scheme of the universe 
as about teaching a new sense of duty. It was his privi- 
lege to start a religion independent of dogma and priest- 
hood, sacrifice and sacrament, which would insist on an 
inward change of heart and a system of self-culture. He 
made it clear that salvation does not depend on the 
acceptance of doubtful dogmas or doing deeds of darkness 
to appease an angry God. It depends on the perfection 
of character and devotion to the good. The moral law is 
not the chance invention of an exceptional mind, or the 
dogma of a doubtful revelation, but the necessary expres- 



358 INDIAN PHILOSOPHY 

sion of the truth of things. Ignorance of truth is, accord- 
ing to Buddha, the cause of all misery. To deny the moral 
value of austere asceticism, to repudiate the popular re- 
ligion, to despise the Vedic ceremonialism, in short, to make 
a religion of philosophy, is a great speculative venture, the 
daring of which we cannot rightly estimate. We find in 
the early teaching of Buddhism three marked charac- 
teristics, an ethical earnestness, an absence of any theological 
tendency and an aversion to metaphysical speculation. 

Buddha had to reckon with the decline of the sense 
for the supernatural and the ideas of faith. In a period 
of self-questioning and self-testing, when men learned to 
look with a sharper eye on all that has hitherto been 
unthinkingly accepted, it is impossible to exempt faith 
from criticism. When serious thinkers dismissed the soul 
as a phantom, and immortality as a hallucination, it was 
no use trying to demonstrate their reality. Buddha 
adopted the critical spirit, but wished to set limits to it. 
His attitude was a perfect contrast to the spirit of scep- 
ticism, indifference and flippancy which characterised the 
materialist thinkers ; yet he gathers up and concentrates 
the illumination of the age and gives us a penetrating criti- 
cism of traditional beliefs. After all, systems of thought 
and practice are only working hypotheses by which suc- 
cessive ages try to satisfy the aspirations and harmonise 
the results of advancing knowledge and growing insight. 
The environment is changed, knowledge has increased. 
The spirit of scepticism is afoot. Traditional religion has 
become unbelievable. Thinking men were devising some 
larger theories with which to walk through life and bring 
the ineradicable aspirations of human nature into harmony 
with the obvious data of experience. Buddha stood forth 
as the spokesman of the age. He was deeply influenced 
by the reaction setting in against the popular beliefs. There 
is no mistaking the fact that he merely accelerated what 
the stream of events was already rolling onward. He 
focussed the spirit of the age and gave a voice to the vague 
ana unsystematised feelings of thinking men. He was at 
once the prophet and the exponent of the time spirit. 
Hegel compares the man of genius in relation to his age 



ETHICAL IDEALISM OF BUDDHISM 359 


to one who places the last and the locking stone in an arch. 
Many hands help to build the structure, but it is in his 
hand alone that it becomes a complete work, sure and self- 
sustained. Such a master’s hand was that of Buddha, 
one of the greatest of India’s thinkers. Buddha’s relation 
to his predecessors is analogous to that of Socrates to the 
Sophists. While in one sense his system is an expression 
of the current of criticism, it was also destined to stem 
the tide by strengthening the spiritual though not the 
religious view of reality. Immortality may be unbelievable 
and God may be inconceivable, yet the demands of duty 
are absolute. 

We cannot consider Buddha a rationalist. Rationalism 
is defined as “ the mental habit of using reason for the 
destruction of religious beliefs .” 1 Buddha did not set 
out with the intention of reaching negative results. Being 
a disinterested seeker after truth, he did not start with 
any prejudice. Yet he is a rationalist, since he wished to 
study reality or experience without any reference to super- 
natural revelation. In this matter Buddha is at one 
with modern scientists, who are of opinion that the idea of 
supernatural interference should not be introduced into the 
logical interpretation of natural phenomena. Buddha had 
so firm a grip of the connectedness of things that he would 
not tolerate miraculous interferences of the cosmic order or 
magical disturbances of mental life. 

Feeling that there was no use in making an appeal to 
faith in an age which had lost all faith in faith, he relied 
on reason and experience and wished to lead men by mere 
force of logic to his view's. He wanted to establish a 
“ religion wfithin the bounds of pure reason,” and thus put 
an end to both superstition and scepticism. He rarely 
assumes the prophetic role. He is a dialectician, arguing 
with his opponents to lead them to liberation. He pre- 
sents to his followers the experience through which he 
himself has passed, and exhorts them to verify for themselves 
his views and conclusions. " The doctrine is not based on 
hearsay, it means ‘ come and see.' ” 2 " Buddha does not 

1 Beun : History oj English Rationalism in the Nineteenth Century , vol. i., 
p. 4, » Samyutta Nikaya, iii. 



360 


INDIAN PHILOSOPHY 


liberate men, but he teaches them how to liberate them- 
selves as he has liberated himself. Men adhere to his 
preaching of the truth, not because it comes from him, 
but because, aroused by his word, a personal knowledge of 
what he preaches arises in the light of their minds.” 1 
His method is that of psychological analysis. He en- 
deavoured to rid himself of all illegitimate speculation, build 
from the raw material of experience, and assist the spiritual 
growth of suffering humanity by an honest and unbiassed 
expression of the results of his thought and experience. 
According to him, ‘‘If a man sees things as they really 
are, he will cease to pursue shadows and cleave to the 
great reality of goodness.” Laying aside metaphysical 
speculations, he traces out the reign of law and order in 
the world of experience. Understanding, according to him, 
is to be limited to the field of experience, the laws of which 
it can explore. 


VI 

Buddha and the Upanisads 

For a revelation of the struggles of spirit and the experi- 
ences of the soul, Buddha had ready to hand that supreme 
work of the Indian genius, the Upanisads. Early Buddhism 
is not an absolutely original doctrine. It is no freak in the 
evolution of Indian thought. Buddha did not break away 
completely from the spiritual ideas of his age and country. 
To be in open revolt against the conventional and legalistic 
religion of the time is one thing ; to abandon the living 
spirit lying behind it is another. Buddha himself admits 
that the dharma which he has discovered by an effort of 
self-culture is the ancient way, the Aryan path, the eternal 
dharma. Buddha is not so much creating a new dharma 
as rediscovering an old norm. It is the venerable tradition 
that is being adapted to meet the special needs of the age. 
To develop his theory Buddha had only to rid the Upani- 
sads of their inconsistent compromises with Vedic poly- 
theism and religion, set aside the transcendental aspect as 

1 Oldenberg : Buddha . 



ETHICAL IDEALISM OF BUDDHISM 3G1 


being indemonstrable to thought and unnecessary to 
morals, and emphasise the ethical universaiism of the 
Upanisads. Early Buddhism, we venture to nazard a 
conjecture, is only a restatement of the thought of the 
Upanisads from a new standpoint. Rhys Davids says : 
“ Gautama was born and brought up and lived and died 
a Hindu. . . . There was not much in the metaphysics 
and principles of Gautama which cannot be found in one 
or other of the orthodox systems, and a great deal of his 
morality could be matched from earlier or later Hindu 
books. Such originality as Gautama possessed lay in the 
way in which he adopted, enlarged, ennobled and systema- 
tised that which had already been well said by others ; 
in the way in which he carried out to their logical conclu- 
sion principles of equity and justice already acknowledged 
by some of the most prominent Hindu thinkers. The 
difference between him and other teachers lay chiefly in 
his deep earnestness and in his broad public spirit of 
philanthropy.” 1 * “ It is certain that Buddhism has acquired 

as an inheritance from Brahmanism not merely a series 
of its most important dogmas, but what is not less signifi- 
cant to the historian, the bent of its religious thought and 
feeling, which is more easily comprehended than expressed 
in words.” 3 The contempt for ritualism was common to 
him and the Upanisads. Buddhism shared with the rest 
of Aryan India the belief in the law of karma and the 
possibility of attaining nirvana. That sorrow or suffering 
is the essential fact of life on earth is admitted by almost 
all schools of Indian thought, the Upanisads included. 
Buddha himself was not aware of any incongruity between 
his theory and that of the Upanisads. He felt that he 
had the support and sympathy of the Upanisads and 
their followers. He classed the Brahmins along with the 
Buddhist mendicants, and used the word as one of honour 
in reference to the Buddhist arhats and saints. Buddhism, 
in its origin at least, is an offshoot of Hinduism. " Buddhism 
grew and flourished within the fold of orthodox belief.” 3 

1 Buddhism, pp. 83-84. 

» Oldenberg : Buddha, p. 53. 

3 Rhys Davids: Buddhism, p. 85. 



362 


INDIAN PHILOSOPHY 


Throughout this account of early Buddhism we shall 
endeavour to show how the spirit of the Upanisads is 
the life-spring of Buddhism. 


VII 

Suffering 

From his spiritual experience, Buddha became con- 
vinced of the four noble truths, that there is suffering, 1 
that it has a cause, 1 that it can be suppressed, 3 and that 
there is a way to accomplish this.t 

The first noble truth is the tyranny of pain. Life is 
suffering. “ Now, this is the noble truth concerning suffer- 
ing. Birth is painful, decay is painful, disease is painful, 
death is painful, union with the unpleasant is painful ; 
painful is the separation from the pleasant, and any craving 
that is unsatisfied, that too is painful. In brief, the five 
aggregates 5 which spring from attachment are painful.” 6 
In the age of Buddha men of keen intellect and deep feeling 
were asking, What does all this weary round of existence 
mean ? and Buddha addressed his appeal to the men who 
were longing for a way of escape, a resort to nirvana, where 
the wicked cease from troubling and the weary are at rest. 
Insistence on suffering is not peculiar to Buddhism, though 
Buddha emphasised it overmuch. In the whole history of 
thought no one has painted the misery of human existence 
in blacker colours and with more feeling than Buddha. 
The melancholy foreshadowed in the Upanisads occupies 
the central place here. Possibly the ascetic ideals of an 
unreasoned exaltation of poverty, glorification of self- 
sacrifice, and an obsession of renunciation cast a hypnotic 
spell over Buddha’s mind. To make people long for escape 
from this world, its blackness is a little overdrawn. We 
may try all we can to spread comfort and happiness and 
suppress all social injustice, yet man will not have satis- 


« Duhkha. * Samudaya. 

3 Nirodha. 4 Marga. 

5 Body, feeling, perception, will and reason. 

* Foundation of the Kingdom of Righteousness, p. 5. 



ETHICAL IDEALISM OF BUDDHISM 363 


faction. Buddha concludes, existence is pain, the struggle 
to maintain individuality is painful, and the fluctuations 
of fortune are frightful . 1 In the Dhammapada, it is said: 
" Not in the sky nor in the depths of the ocean, nor having 
entered the caverns of the mountain, nay such a place is 
not to be found in the world where a man might dwell 
without being overpowered by death.” The most moral 
hero and the greatest w'ork of art must one day be cast 
down and consumed in death. All things pass away. Our 
dreams and hopes, our fears and desires — all of them will 
be forgotten as though they had never been. The great 
aeons will sweep on, the unending generations will hurry 
past. None can resist the universal supremacy of death. 
Death is the law of all life. The evanescence of all human 
things is a source of melancholy to which many are subject. 
Our mind cannot grasp the substance of what it aims at, 
nor our lives realise the visions it sees. All fulfilment of 
desire is attended with pain. The misery of human nature, 
with its eternal longing, which creates wants much in 
advance of man’s power of satisfying them, cannot but 
make us feel that life is a curse. Tormented by thought, 
cheated by chance, defeated by the forces of nature, 
oppressed by the massive weight of duty, the horror of 
death, the dread consciousness of coming lives where the 
tragedy of existence will be repeated, the individual cannot 
help crying, “ Let me escape, let me die.” The remedy 
for all the woes of earth lies in getting out of it. \ 


1 " The pilgrimage (samsara) of beings/" Buddha says, " has its begin- 
ning in eternity. No opening can be discovered, from which proceeding, 
creatures, mazed in ignorance, fettered by a thirst for being, stray and 
wander. What think ye, disciples, whether is more, the water which is in 
the four great oceans, or the tears which have flown from you and have 
been shed by you, while ye strayed and wandered on this long pilgrimage 
and sorrowed and wept, because that was your portion which ye abhorred 
and that which ye loved was not your portion ? A mother’s death, a brother’s 
death, the loss of relations, the loss of property, all this have ye experienced 
through long ages, and while ye experienced this through long ages, more 
tears have flowed from you and have been shed by you, while ye strayed 
and wandered on this pilgrimage, and sorrowed and wept, because that was 
your portion which ye abhorred, and that which ye loved was not your 
portion, than all the water which is in the four great oceans.” Sarhyutta 
Nikaya ; Oldenberg : Buddha, pp. 216-217 



364 INDIAN PHILOSOPHY 

To the thinking, the unutterable sadness of transience 
and the pitiful ineffectualness of virtue are the striking 
facts. Kant in his article on the “ Failure of Every Philoso- 
phical Attempt in Theodicy” (1791), refuting the optimism 
of Leibniz, asks : “ Would any man of sound understanding 
who has lived long enough and has meditated on the worth 
of human existence care to go again through life’s poor 
play, I do not say on the same conditions, but on any 
conditions whatever ? ” The gloominess and grief of the 
great philosophers are perhaps the products of their thought. 
Those who feel but do not think have a better lot. 

We cannot help feeling that Buddha overemphasises the 
dark side of things. The Buddhist view of life seems to 
be lacking in courage and confidence. Its emphasis on 
sorrow, if not false, is not true. The predominance of pain 
over pleasure is an assumption. Nietzsche had Buddha in 
mind when he said, " they meet an invalid, or an old man, 
or a corpse, and immediately they say, life is refuted.” 
After all, the value of life seems to rise with its evanes- 
cence. If the beauty of youth and the dignity of age are 
transient, so are the travail of birth and the agony of death. 
There is a tendency in Buddhism to blacken what is dark 
and darken what is grey. The outlook is restricted on 
principle to all that is sharp, bitter and painful in life. 

But Buddhism would justify Buddha’s attitude by 
saying that every religion exaggerates the suffering of life, 
for the aim of religion is the redemption from sin and 
suffering. With a happy world there would have been no 
need for religion. How can we escape from this w'orld of 
death ? is the question which the Upanisads ask, and 
Buddha is now asking it with a renewed force. Naciketas, 
the Brahmin, asked Yama, Death, in the Katha Upanisad : 
“ Keep thou thy houses, keep dance, and song for thyself. 
Shall we be happy with these things, seeing thee ? ” 1 
The Buddhist asks : “ How is there laughter, how is there 
joy, as the world is always burning ? Why do ye not seek 
a light, ye who are surrounded by darkness ? This body 
is wasted, full of sickness and frail ; this heap of corruption 
breaks to pieces. Life indeed ends in death.” 2 

* i. 1. 26. * Dhammapada, xi. 146. 148. 



ETHICAL IDEALISM OF BUDDHISM 365 


If pessimism means that life on earth is not worth living 
unless it be in purity and detachment, then Buddhism is 
pessimism. If it means that it is best to be done with 
life on earth for there is bliss beyond, then Buddhism is 
pessimism. But this is not true pessimism. A system is 
pessimistic if it stifles all hope and declares “ to live on 
earth is weariness and there is no bliss beyond.” Some 
forms of Buddhism do declare this and are justly called 
pessimistic. So far as the early teaching of Buddha is 
concerned, it is not that. It is true that it considers life to 
be an unending succession of torments, but it believes in 
the liberating power of ethical discipline and the perfecti- 
bility of human nature. Again, though the suffering of 
creation weighs upon Buddha’s mind, it does not seem to 
be purposeless. Desire is there to impel us to the supreme 
effort to abandon all desire. Each man has his own burden 
to bear, and every heart knows its own bitterness, and yet 
through it all goodness grows and progress becomes per- 
fection. The world with all its suffering seems adapted to 
the growth of goodness. Buddha does not preach the mere 
worthlessness of life or resignation to an inevitable doom. 
His is not a doctrine of despair. He asks us to revolt 
against evil and attain a life of a finer quality, an arhata 
state. 


VIII 

Causes of Suffering 

In answering the second question of the causes of 
suffering Buddhism has recourse to psychological analysis 
and metaphysical speculations. “ Now this is the noble 
truth of the origin of suffering. Verily it is the craving 
thirst that causes the renewal of becomings, that is accom- 
panied by sensual delights, and seeks satisfaction, now 
here, now there — that is to say, the craving for the gratifi- 
cation of the senses, or the craving for prosperity.” 1 

The Upanisads have already indicated the cause of 
suffering. To them the eternal is bliss and the transient 

» Foundation of the Kingdom of Righteousness, p. 6. 



366 INDIAN PHILOSOPHY 

painful. Yo vai bhiima tad amrtam any ad art am. The eternal 
unchanging is the truth, freedom and happiness, but the 
world of birth, old age and death is subject to suffering. 
The real is not to be found in the not-self, which is subject 
to origination and decease. It is there where these have 
no dominion. There is sorrow because all things are 
transient. They vanish as soon as they occur. The law 
of causality conditions all being which is in a state of 
perpetual becoming, arising and passing away. “ There 
are three things, O King, which you cannot find in the 
world. That which, whether conscious or unconscious, is 
not subject to decay and death, that you will not find. 
That quality of anything (organic or inorganic) which is 
not impermanent, that you will not find. And in the 
highest sense there is no such thing as being possessed of 
being.” 1 " And that which is transient, 0 monks, is it 

painful or pleasant ? ” “Painful, Master.” 2 Sorrow is one 
with transiency. Desires cause suffering, since we desire 
what is impermanent, changeable and perishable. It is 
the impermanence of the object of desire that causes dis- 
appointment and regret. All pleasures are transient. The 
fundamental proposition of the system that life is sorrow 
is dogmatically accepted from the Upanisads. 

Buddha establishes that there is nothing permanent, 
and if only the permanent deserved to be called the self 
or Atman, then nothing on earth is self. Everything is 
anatta or not-self. " All are impermanent, body, sensation, 
perception, Saiikharas and consciousness, all these are 
sorrow. They are all not-self.” Nothing of them is sub- 
stantial. They are appearances empty of substance or 
reality. What we consider the self is a succession of 
empty shows too insignificant to be worth fighting about. 
If men quarrel about them, it is because of their ignorance. 
“ On what existing do decrepitude and death come into 
existence, and on what do they depend ? On birth taking 
place, decrepitude and death come into existence, and 
they depend on birth ... on ignorance subsiding, ideas 

i Milinda, iv. 7. 12 ; sec also Bhikkhunlsarhyutta ; Dhammapada, v. 
47-48 ; and Oldenberg : Buddha, pp. 218-219. 

• See Majjhima Nikaya, iii. 19; Buddhawhcra : AtthasalinI, E.T., p. 74. 



ETHICAL IDEALISM OF BUDDHISM 367 


subside, and on its cessation is their cessation, on the 
cessation of ideas is the cessation of apprehension.” 1 
Ignorance is the main cause out of which false desire 
springs. When knowledge is attained suffering is at an 
end. Ignorance and false desire are the theoretical and the 
practical sides of one fact. The empty abstract form of 
false will is ignorance, the concrete realisation of ignorance 
is false will. In actual life the two are one. To the 
Buddhist, as to the Indian thinkers in general, knowledge 
and wall are so closely related that no distinction is drawn 
between them. The same word celana is used to signify 
both thinking and willing. As we shall see, exercises of 
thought are looked upon as preparatory to the purifying 
of heart and will. Ignorance of truth is the antecedent 
condition of all life. For one clear, piercing, scrutinising 
glance is enough to make us feel that nothing on earth, 
wife or child, fame or honour, love or wealth is worth 
pursuing. " For all that is, when clung to falls short.” 2 
A wonderful philosophy of dynamism was formulated 
by Buddha 2,500 years ago, a philosophy which is being 
recreated for us by the discoveries of modern science and 
the adventures of modern thought. The electro-magnetic 
theory of matter has brought about a revolution in the 
general concept of the nature of physical reality. It is 
no more static stuff but radiant energy. An analogous 
change has pervaded the world of psychology, and the title 
of a recent book by M. Bergson, Mind Energy, indicates 
the change in the theory of psychical reality. Impressed 
by the transitoriness of objects, the ceaseless mutation 
and transformation of things, Buddha formulated a philo- 
sophy of change. He reduces substances, souls, monads, 
things to forces, movements, sequences and processes, and 
adopts a dynamic conception of reality. Life is nothing 
but a series of manifestations of becomings and extinc- 
tions.3 It is a stream of becoming.4 The world of sense 
and science is from moment to moment. It is a recurring 

1 Lalitavistara. 1 Majjhima Nikaya, 32. 

3 Patubhavo-uppado. 

4 “ All things are in a state of flux." " Reality is a condition of unrest.” 
(Heraclitus: Fragments, 46 and 84.) 



368 


INDIAN PHILOSOPHY 


rotation of birth and death. Whatever be the duration of 
any state of being, as brief as a flash of lightning or as long 
as a millennium, yet all is becoming. All things change. 
All schools of Buddhism agree that there is nothing human 
or divine that is permanent. Buddha gives us a discourse 
on fire 1 to indicate the ceaseless flux of becoming called 
the world. 1 


Worlds on worlds are rolling ever. 

From creation to decay. 

Like the bubbles on a river. 

Sparkling, bursting, borne away.l 

Though the flame maintains itself unchanged in appear- 
ance, every moment it is another and not the same flame. 
The stream is sustained in its flow by ever new waters. 
The becoming of all that is, is the central fact of Buddhism. 
Absolute reality is not the property of anything on earth. 
“It is impossible that what is born should not die.” 4 
" Whatever is subject to origination is subject also to 
destruction.” 5 Necessary and inexorable is the dying of 
all that is born. The difference is only in the degree of 
duration. A few may last for years, and others for a brief 
while. Change is the stuff of reality. There is neither 
permanence nor identity with regard to the world. It is 
only the transmitting of force. The idea might have arisen 
from reflection on consciousness and the apparent transi- 
toriness of all objects of nature. Uninterrupted change 
is the feature of our conscious life. The living universe is 
a reflection of our mind. Each single phenomenon is but 
a link in the chain, a transitory phase of evolution, and 
the several chains constitute the one whole, dharmadhdtu, 
or the spiritual universe. Buddha adopts the golden mean 
even here. “ This world, O Kaccana, generally proceeds 
on a duality, on the ‘it is ' and the ‘ it is not.’ But, O 
Kaccana, whoever perceives in truth and wisdom, how 

* Cf. Heraclitus : “ This world is an eternally living fire.” Buddha 

and Heraclitus both use fire, the most mutable of the elements, to represent 
the metaphysical principle of becoming. 

1 Mahavagga, i. 121. 3 Shelley: Hellas. 

« Abhidharmakosavyakhya. 5 Mahavagga, 1-23. 



ETHICAL IDEALISM OF BUDDHISM 369 

things originate in the world, in his eyes, there is no ‘ it is 
not.’ . . . Whoever, Kaccana, perceives in truth and wisdom 
how things pass away in this world, in his eyes there is 
no ‘it is ’ in this world. . . . ‘ Everything is ’—this is one 
extreme, 0 Kaccana. ‘ Everything is not ’ is another 
extreme. The truth is the middle.” 1 It is a becoming 
without beginning or end. There is no static moment 
when the becoming attains to beinghood. No sooner than 
we conceive it by the attributes of name and form than it 
has changed to something else. 2 3 

How do we come to think of things, rather than of 
processes in this absolute flux ? By shutting our eyes to 
the successive events. It is an artificial attitude that 
makes sections in the stream of change, and calls them 
things. Identity of objects is an unreality. Out of the 
conditions and relations we build a seemingly stable uni- 
verse. In dealing with the world we have to employ 
relations of different kinds, such as substance and quality, 
whole and part, cause and effect, which are mutually 
involved. The eight principal relative conceptions which 
we ignorantly regard as absolute are origination and cessa- 
tion, persistence and discontinuance, unity and plurality, 
coming and going. Even the modes of existence and non- 
existence are mutually dependent, so that one is possible 
only in relation to the other. All these relations are con- 
tingent and not necessary. They are not true, as Kant 
would say, of things in themselves.3 They operate only in 
our world, i.e. the world of appearance or phenomena. So 
long as we look upon these limited and relative concep- 
tions as absolutely true, we are subject to ignorance, the 
cause of life’s misery. When we know the truth of things, 
we shall realise how absurd it is for us to worship isolated 
products of the incessant series of transformations as though 
they were eternal and real. Life is no thing or state of a 
thing, but a continuous movement or change. It is the 
Bergsonian attitude in germ. 

1 Samyutta Nikaya. Oldenberg : Buddha, p. 249. 

* See Saiiiyutta Isikaya, xxii. 90. 16. 

3 Time, according to Buddliaghr-sa, is “a notion abstracted by mere 
usage from this or that event," Atthasalinl, E.T., p. 78. 



370 INDIAN PHILOSOPHY 

Identity of objects is only another name for continuity 
of becoming. A child — a boy — a youth — a man — an old 
man are one. The seed and the tree are one. The 
banyan tree a thousand years old is one and the same 
plant with the seed out of which it has grown. It is the 
succession that gives the appearance of an unbroken 
identity. Though the substance of our bodies as well as the 
constitution of our souls changes from moment to moment, 
still we say it is the same old thing or the same old man. 
A thing is only a series of states of which the first is said 
to be the cause of the second, for they seem to be of the 
same nature. The seeming identity from moment to 
moment consists in a continuity of moments which we may 
call the continuity of an ever changing identity. The 
world is a number of accidents ever changing and being 
renewed at every breath and each moment disappearing, 
only to be replaced by a similar set. In consequence of 
this rapid succession, the spectator is deceived into the 
belief that the universe is a permanent existence, even as 
a glowing stick whirled round produces the appearance of 
a complete circle. A useful convention makes us give 
names and forms to the individual. The identity of name 
and form is no evidence of the identity of the inner 
reality. Again, we are naturally led to imagine a per- 
manent core, but it is an abstraction of thinking. We say 
it rains, while there is no “ it ” at all. There is nothing but 
movement, no doer but deed, nothing else but a becoming. 

To account for the continuity of the world in the 
absence of a permanent substratum, Buddha announces 
the law of causation and makes it the basis of continuity. 
The law of universal causation, with its corollary of the 
eternal continuity of becoming, is the chief contribution of 
Buddhism to Indian thought. Existence is transformation. 
It is a series of successive states. All things undergo the 
changes indicated in utpada (origination), sthiti (staying), 
jar a (growth), and nirodha (destruction). “ Know that 
whatever exists arises from causes and conditions, and is in 
every respect impermanent.” Whatever has a cause must 
perish. '* Anything whatever born, brought into being and 
organised, contains within itself the inherent necessity of 



ETHICAL IDEALISM OF BUDDHISM 371 


dissolution.” ” All component things must grow old.” 
Every substance is organic, and its existence is only a con- 
tinuity of changes, each of which is determined by its pre- 
existing conditions. A thing is only a force, a cause, a 
condition. It is called a dharma. “ I will teach you the 
dharma,” says Buddha, " that being present, this becomes ; 
from the arising of that, this arises. That being absent, 
this does not become ; from the cessation of that, this 
ceases.” 1 For Buddha, as for the Upanisads, the whole 
world is conditioned by causes. While the Upanisads say 
that things have no self-existence as such, but are products 
of a causal series which has no beginning or end, Buddha 
says things are the products of conditions. The Upanisads 
are as clear as early Buddhism, that in this world of unrest- 
ing change and eternal becoming there is no firm resting 
place for man. 

That which constitutes being in the material realm of 
things is only the fiaticcasamuftfiada, or the origin of one 
thing in dependence on another. Causality is always a 
self-changing or becoming. The essence of a thing, its 
dharma, is its immanent law of relation. There is no 
being which changes. There is only a self-changing or self- 
forming. We cannot say, as in the Nyaya philosophy, that 
one thing is the cause of something else. For a thing is 
what it is, and it cannot become something else. As the 
world process is affiliated to conscious growth, so is the 
force of causality related to inner motivation. Organic 
growth is the type of all becoming. The past is drawn 
up into the moving flow. The difficulty of external causa- 
tion is due to the fact that in the outside world our know- 
ledge is confined to relations of phenomena. But in our 
inner consciousness we know that our will determines acts. 
The same force operates throughout. Schopenhauer calls 
it the “ will.” Buddha calls it “ karma.” It is the one 
reality, the thing in itself of which the whole world is the 
working out. In the external world causation becomes 
uniform antecedence. That is the cause, given which 
another occurs. After all the trouble of modern philosophy, 
causation is not defined in more adequate terms. Students 
1 Majjhima Nikaya, ii. 32. 



372 INDIAN PHILOSOPHY 

of natural science like Karl Pearson ask us to replace the 
idea of causation by the category of correlation. Cause 
and effect represent earlier and later stages of a continuous 
process. We describe the course of events by the aid of 
the formula of causality, but do not explain why things 
happen as they do. Ultimate causes may be the province 
of metaphysics, but observation is limited to secondary 
causes. The aim of Buddhism is not philosophical explana- 
tion, but scientific description. So Buddha answers the 
question of the cause of any given state of a thing by describ- 
ing to us the conditions of its coming about, even in the 
spirit of modern science. 

The causal evolution is not to be viewed as a mechanical 
succession of movements, in which case the world process 
becomes a series of extinctions and fresh creations, but is 
one state working itself up to another state or informing 
it with a ceaseless pulsation. It is the determination of 
the present by the past. Buddhism believes in transitive 
causation, where one state transmits its paccayasatti, or 
causal energy, to some newly conceived germ. Causal 
relations are of the type of the seed growing into the tree, 
where the one is necessary for the other. All life is force. 
Though we can never see the working of the force, it is 
there ; in consciousness we feel its presence. The world- 
process is of the nature of a self-acting development. It 
appears to be a series of incessantly succeeding phenomena, 
while it is a continuous development comparable to an 
indivisible melody. There is a cohesion of the past with 
the present which is broken up into a succession of before 
and after in our external treatment of nature. Then life 
becomes just one thing after another, and causality becomes 
mere succession, as Nagasena asserts. 

The doctrine of impermanence held in common by the 
Upanisads and early Buddhism is developed by later 
Buddhism into the view of momentariness. But to say that 
things are anitya or impermanent is different from saying 
that they are momentary or ksanika. Buddha holds that 
only consciousness is momentary and not things, for he 
says : “ It is evident that the body lasts one year ... a 
hundred years and even more. But that which is called 



ETHICAL IDEALISM OF BUDDHISM 373 

mind, intellect, consciousness, keeps up an incessant round 
by day and by night, of perishing as one thing and spring- 
ing up as another.” 1 It was Buddha’s interest to show 
that body, mind, etc., are not the true self. They are not 
the permanent. Impermanence when predicated of things 
in general does not mean momentariness. It is only when 
Buddha speaks of mind that he uses the analogy of a 
flame. The flame of a lamp is a succession of flames each 
of which lasts only an instant, and thought ( citta ) process 
is of the same type. He clearly distinguishes the momentary 
character of mental processes from the impermanent nature 
of non-mental reality. When this momentary character is 
extended to all existence we get the ksanikavdda. 
Later Buddhists believe that all existence is momentary. 
Permanent existence, they argue, is a self-contradiction. 
Existence or sattva means practical efficiency, or artha- 
kriyakaritva. Existence is the capacity to produce some 
change in the order of things. The seed exists since it 
produces shoots. Permanent things, however, cannot possess 
this power of producing changes. If things were unchanged 
in past, present and future, there would be no reason why 
they should produce different effects at different points of 
time. If it is said that the potential power is permanent, 
and it becomes actual when certain other conditions are 
fulfilled, it is replied that whatever has power to do a thing 
does it, and whatever does not do it has no power. If the 
conditions bring about the change, then they alone exist 
and not the permanent thing. If existence means causal 
efficiency, then things that exist are momentary. 
“ Strictly speaking, the duration of the life of a living 
being is exceedingly brief, lasting only while a thought 
lasts. Just as a chariot wheel in rolling rolls only at one 
point of the tyre, and in resting rests only at one point ; 
in exactly the same way the life of a living being lasts 
only for the period of one thought. As soon as that thought 
has ceased the living being is said to have ceased.” 1 On 


1 Samyutta, ii. 96. Buddha does not say so definitely as Bergson does 
that the difference between the two, consciousness and matter, is only a 
difference of tension, or rhythm, or rate of moving. 

* Visuddhimagga, chap, viii. 



374 INDIAN PHILOSOPHY 

this view of momentariness with which Buddhism became 
identified very early in its career, the nature of movement 
is hard to grasp. When a body seems to move, what happens 
is that it is continuously renewed. It is reborn each moment, 
as a flame which is always being renewed and never remains 
even for a moment identical with itself. 

Nature is one continuous vibration, an infinite growth 
bound by an iron chain of causality. It is a continuous 
whole, one and indivisible. Anything that happens sends 
a throb through the whole circle of existence, which is only 
another name for ceaseless change. Even in the mere 
mechanism of a soulless universe Buddhism sees an eternal 
cosmic law or ordered procedure. It is “ a mighty maze, 
but not without a plan.” 1 The wheel of the cosmic order 
goes on “ without maker, without known beginning, con- 
tinuously to exist by nature of concatenation of cause and 
effect.” 2 

The order of the universe is called in Pali, Niyama, or 
the process of going on. Some time before the period of 
Buddhaghosa (fifth century a.d.), and after the collection 
of the pitakas, five orders were distinguished and named 
Kammaniyama, or order of act and result ; Utuniyama, or 
physical inorganic order; Bijaniyama, or order of plants, 
the organic order ; Cittaniyama, or order of conscious life ; 
Dhammaniyama, or order of the norm, or the effect of 
nature to produce a perfect type. It is Kammaniyama 
that declares that good and bad actions result in desirable 
and undesirable results. It represents the universal fact 
that certain acts, bodily, mental, etc., eventually result in 
pain to the doer and his fellows while other acts bring 
happiness to both. It is the sequence of deed and effect 
that Kamma emphasises. 

This huge world of life and motion, which is always 
becoming, always changing, growing, striving, has yet a 
law at the centre of it. This is the main destinction between 
early Buddhism and Bergsonism. To Bergson life means 
the absence of law, to Buddha all life is an illustration of- 
a general law. The Buddhistic conception of life and law 
lights with its splendour the discoveries of science and gives 

1 Pope. • Buddhagho?a : Visuddhimagga, xvii. 



ETHICAL IDEALISM OF BUDDHISM 375 


meaning to the deepest instincts of man. The certainty of 
law is able to lift the awful weight which the suffering of 
life has laid upon the human spirit and fills the future 
with hope, for the individual can reach beyond the struggle 
and suffering inseparable from life if only he strives for it. 

The fundamental difference between Buddhism and the 
Upanisads seems to be about the metaphysical reality of 
an immutable substance, which is the true self of man as 
well. We have to decide whether it is the idea of Buddha 
to look upon the universal order as coming out of nothing 
and going back to nothing. It is true that Buddha finds no 
centre of reality or principle of permanence in the flux of 
life and the whirl of the world, but it does not follow that 
there is nothing real in the world at all except the agitation 
of forces. The vital question is that of the original cause 
which set the wheel in motion. Who gave the impetus ? 
If the mind is a flux and the object world another, is there 
or is there not a whole in which the two have their 
being ? If our attention is confined to the phenomenal 
world, we cannot say on what the world rests, elephant 
on tortoise or tortoise on elephant, whether the causality 
of the world is the creation of God, or the evolution of a 
substance, or a natural unfolding out of its own interior. 
Buddha simply accepts the facts of experience. Things 
change. There is no being in the world, but only becoming. 
In such a state the supreme reality is the law of change, 
and that is causality. Buddha does not speak of any final 
cause or chance. The universe is governed by necessity. 
There is no chaotic anarchy or capricious interference. 
Oldenberg expresses the difference between the Brahmanical 
and the Buddhistic conceptions in these words : “ The 
speculation of Brahmins apprehended being in all becoming, 
that of the Buddhists becoming in all apparent being. In 
the former case substance without causality, in the latter 
causality without substance.” 1 This description exagger- 
ates the dominant aspects of the two systems, which are 
agreed on the fundamentals, though there is a difference 
in the distribution of emphasis. For the Upanisads as 
much as for Buddha, “ the universe is a living whole, 

1 Buddha, p. 251. 



376 INDIAN PHILOSOPHY 

which, apart from violence and partial death, refuses to 
divide itself into well-defined objects and clear-cut dis- 
tinctions.” 1 It is an undivided movement. The Upani- 
sads do not posit a mere being exclusive of becoming. 
They do not regard the world of becoming as an illusion. 
Even Oldenberg admits that the thinkers of the Upanisads 
perceived an aspect of being in all becoming. They do not 
look upon the world of becoming as an unrelated proces- 
sion of states. It may be appearance, but yet it is the 
appearance of reality. The Upanisads exclude the idea of 
absolute change by calling attention to the fact that there 
is a permanent underlying the flux. Changes are alterna- 
tions in the special determinations, or accidents of a per- 
manent substance. While the whole is unchangeable, the 
changes are the relative determinations of aspects of the 
whole, and these successive phases are bound by law. 
Buddha does not say that all change involves a permanent 
that changes, nor does he say that change alone is per- 
manent, as some of his followers interpret him. He is 
indifferent to the “ being ” of things and finds the reality 
relevant to our practical interests in growth. But even if 
we hold with Nagasena that we have only sequence, we cannot 
help asking, if everything is conditioned, is there an uncon- 
ditioned ? Without it causality contradicts itself. If each 
phenomenon is referred to another as its sufficient reason and 
that again to another, we cannot in the nature of the case find 
a sufficient reason for anything. We must somehow get 
beyond the category of cause to some being which is its own 
cause and remains one with itself in spite of all its changes. 
When we say that the transient is known as transient, we 
oppose it to the eternal, and the question of the reality of 
the eternal is raised. Either we should look upon the ulti- 
mate reality as a growing principle, or we must admit some 
permanent element which manifests and maintains itself in 
the whole process of change. In any case a principle of 
being or identity is admitted. 

According to Aristotle, identity is necessary for all 
change. All change involves a permanent that changes. 
We cannot think of change without a permanent. It is 

* Bradley. 



ETHICAL IDEALISM OF BUDDHISM 377 


the truth contained in Kant’s Second Analogy of Experience. 
“ Without the permanent, no relations in time are pos- 
sible.” The succession of “ B ” upon “ A ” means that 
“ A ” is over before ‘‘ B ” begins. The relation between 
them called succession cannot exist for either " A ” or 
“ B,” but only for something present to each of them. If 
there were nothing but successive events in the world, 
nothing but “ A ” vanishing before “ B ” begins, “ B ” 
before “ C ” begins, and so on, there could be no succes- 
sion. The possibility of any succession implies a relative 
permanence. There must be something not in the succession 
but permanent that can carry on each vanishing moment 
of the succession and add it to the next. Even if we grant 
that all change implies a relative permanent, still the 
possibility of everything being relatively permanent implies 
an absolute permanence. We cannot resolve the whole 
into a network of relations, a mere mass of connections 
with nothing to be connected. It is like the flight without 
the bird. Thinghood is not exhausted by mutual relations. 
Buddha, limiting his attention to the world of experience, 
regards being as a continuous process. It is the view 
popularised by Bergson in modern philosophy, that the 
reality of the phenomena lies in the transition or becoming, 
but not in the things viewed. Avidya gives us the illu- 
sory view of static substances. Knowledge gives us insight 
into the impermanence of things, but yet the changes are 
all self-changes, which obey an immanent law of causality. 

If we accept the momentariness view, we have to admit 
causation and continuity with their correlates of permanence 
and identity, or resolve the world into a devil’s dance of 
wild forces, and give up all attempts at comprehending it. 
Sarhkara points out the inconsistency betw'een causation 
with its implication of permanence and the momentariness 
doctrine thus : “ According to the Buddhists everything 
has a momentary existence. So when the second moment 
arrives, the thing which was existing in the first moment 
ceases to exist, and an entirely new thing springs up. 
Accordingly, you cannot maintain that the preceding 
thing is the cause of the succeeding thing, or that the latter 
is the effect of the former The preceding thing, according 



378 INDIAN PHILOSOPHY 

to the theory of momentariness, has ceased to be when 
the succeeding moment arrives ; that is to say, the former 
becomes non-existent when the thing of the succeeding 
moment comes into being, and therefore cannot be regarded 
as producing the latter, since non-existence cannot be the 
cause of existence.” 1 The validity of this objection is 
admitted by some later Buddhists, 2 who argue that there 
is a permanent element underlying all changes. Mr. Sogen 
says : “ The substratum of everything is eternal and per- 
manent. What changes every moment is merely the phase 
of a thing, so that it is erroneous to affirm that according 
to Buddhism the thing of the first moment ceases to exist 
when the second moment arrives.” 3 

Confining his attention to the relative world of becoming, 
Buddha did not posit, like the thinkers of the Upanisads, 
a universal, all-sustaining life beating in every human 
heart, and the centre of the world. We cannot, however, 
deny the reality of the absolute simply because it is inac- 
cessible to knowledge. If all that is, is conditioned, when 
the conditions are exhausted we get a blank. Oldenberg 
observes : “ The conditional can only be thought of as 

conditioned through another conditional. If we follow the 
dialectic consequence solely, it is impossible on the basis 
of this theory of life to conceive how, where a series of 
conditions has run out, annihilating itself, anything else is 
to be recognised as remaining but a vacuum.” 4 Buddha, 
agreeing with the Upanisads, holds that the phenomena 
of the world as known to our intellect possess only a con- 
ditioned existence. Our intellect compels us to posit an 
unconditioned being as the condition of the empirical 
series. This necessary being is not itself a member of the 
series. To be free from the law of contingency and 
dependence, it must be a non-empirical condition. Yet it 
cannot be detached completely from the empirical series, 
for in this case the latter would become unreal. Every- 
thing seems to be, yet not to be ; it is at once being and 

1 V.S., chap. ii. n g. 

* E g., the Sarvastivadins. 

J Systems of Buddhistic Thought, p. 134. 

* Oldenberg : Buddha, p. 277. 



ETHICAL IDEALISM OF BUDDHISM 379 


becoming. Every event compels us to pass beyond it into 
some preceding form of existence, out of which the event 
has come as its evolved equivalent. This theory that 
everything existing is and is not, is real and unreal, sug- 
gests the idealistic view of becoming, which is only an 
evolution of being. This is the main tendency of Buddha’s 
teaching. Every existence is a mediation of two opposites, 
and so far as this world is concerned it is not possible for 
us to separate being and non-being. If we try to isolate 
either of them and determine it strictly by itself, it 
crumbles again, leaving mere nothingness behind. The 
empirical real is the intermediate thing, the progress, the 
movement from not-being to being, the becoming. Buddha 
is convinced of the futility of the logic which attempts to 
deal with objects of sense or thought as though they were 
fixed and static entities instead of phases in an eternal 
process or realisation. His silence on the absolute indicates 
that the eternal substance is not in his view available for 
the explanation of phenomena. Experience is all that is 
open to our knowledge, and the unconditioned lies beyond 
experience. There is no need to waste our time in fruit- 
less efforts to grasp what always eludes us. A strict inter- 
pretation of the relativity of human knowledge compels us 
to admit the impossibility of demonstrating the existence 
or otherwise of a permanent element. Though Buddhism 
and the Upanisads refuse to see ultimate reality of sub- 
stance or being in the ever changing sequence, the differ- 
ence at most is that while the Upanisads assert a reality 
beyond change or becoming. Buddhism adopts a suspense 
of judgment on this question. In no sense is this healthy 
non-committal attitude to be construed into a denial of an 
ultimate being. It is impossible to think that Buddha 
recognised nothing permanent in this rush of the world, 
no resting-place in the universal turmoil where man’s 
troubled heart can find peace. However much Buddha 
tried to refuse to reply to the question of the ultimate reality 
which lay beyond the categories of the phenomenal world, 
he did not seem to have had any doubt about it. “ There 
is an unborn, an unoriginated, an unmade, an uncompounded ; 
were there not, O mendicants, there would be no escape 

VOL. i 13 



380 


INDIAN PHILOSOPHY 


from the world of the born, the originated, the made and the 
compounded.” 1 Buddha believed in an ontological reality 
that endures beneath the shifting appearances of the visible 
world. 


IX 

The World of Change 

Is the becoming of the world real and objective ? The 
main tendency of Buddha is to represent the universe as a 
continuous flow, which is nissatta, or nonentity, nijjxva, or 
soullessness. All that is, is dliamma or grouping of condi- 
tions. It is unreal, but not non-existent. Yet there are 
passages in the early teaching of Buddha which counte- 
nance a purely subjective interpretation of the world. The 
world of object is conditioned by the individual as subject. 
It is within each of us. “ Verily, I declare unto you, that 
with this very body, mortal as it is, and only a fathom 
high, but conscious and endowed with mind, is the world, 
and the waxing thereof and the waning thereof and the 
way that leads to the passing away thereof.” 2 Buddha 
tells the monk who is worried about the question of what 
remains after liberation : “ The question is to be put 

thus : ‘ Where no more is there earth, or water, or fire, 
or wind ? where are dissolved both long and short, and 
large and small, and good and bad ? where are subject 
and object wholly remainderless melted away ? ’ The 
answer is : ‘ By the undoing of consciousness wholly 

remainderless all is melted away.’ " 3 On the subject the 
world rests ; with it it arises and with it it passes away. 
The world of experience is through and through such stuff 
as our dreams are made of. Hard facts of the world are 
a series of sensations. We do not know whether there 
are things to which oui ideas refer. The rotation of the 
world is consequent on the force of karma and ignorance. 
There are also passages which support the interpretation 
that the particulars of the world are individuations of the 

* Udana, viii. 3. 

* Rhys Davids : Dialogues of the Buddha, i. p. 279. It is also suggested 
that the world does not rx.st for the enlightened one. 

S : B^'^dkist Essay*, p 310. 



ETHICAL IDEALISM OF BUDDHISM 381 


one reality, which has neither particularity nor individuality. 
These are forms, which reality assumes, when it becomes 
an object of knowledge. While the former view dissolves 
the world into a dream positing nothing behind the flux, 
the latter reduces the world of knowledge to an appear- 
ance of a trans-empirical reality. 1 The latter is more 
Kantian while the former is more Berkeleyan. We may 
say that the latter interpretation corresponds to the hypo- 
thesis of Schopenhauer that the metaphysical principle is 
the will to live, and things and persons are varied objecti- 
fications of the one will to live. It is also sometimes sug- 
gested that our imperfection called ignorance breaks up 
the one continuous cosmic process into the individual 
persons and separate things. Statements are not wanting 
to the effect that composite substances disappear when 
true knowledge arises, leaving behind the truth of the 
primary elements. The Leibnizean view that simple things 
are permanent while complex things are bound to be dis- 
solved is familiar to early Buddhistic speculation. It 
looks upon the soul also, however, as a combination, and there- 
fore subject to dissolution. The simple indestructible ele- 
ments are conceived materially as earth, water, light, air, 
to which the Vaibha§ikas add a fifth, ether. That an absolute 
Sunya or void abstract space is the reality may be traced to 
some passages, such as Buddha’s answer to Ananda inquir- 
ing about the cause of earthquakes : “ This great earth, 
Ananda, is established on water, the water on wand, and 
the wind rests upon space .” 1 " Venerable Nagasena, 

there are found beings in the world who have come into 
existence through karma, and others who are the result 
of a cause, and others produced by the seasons. Tell me, 
is there anything that does not fall under any of these 
three heads ? ” “ Yes, there are two such things, space 

and nirvana.” 3 Buddha has not left any clear account 
of the world of becoming. Ever so many suggestions are 
made, and they are all developed in a one-sided manner 


1 Katha-'atthu (translated by Aung and Mrs. Rhys Davids under the 
title of Points of Controversy) mentions among the unconditioned reals, space, 
nirvana and the four truths. 

* Pigha Nikaya, 207. 


! Milinda, iv. 



382 


INDIAN PHILOSOPHY 


by the later schools of Buddhism. Nagasena takes up a 
very subjective attitude. To him a thing is nothing but 
the complex of its characters. There is nothing real in 
the body apart from fleeting sensations. Things are only 
mental symbols for complexes of sensations. One of the 
four schools contends that matter is the phantasn?«J play 
of the phenomena of mind. Another, that mind is all. A 
third holds to the philosophy of the void or sunyavada, 
and urges that the world is neither real nor unreal, nor 
both nor neither. Buddha did not feel called upon to 
solve the problem of external reality ; to him it was enough 
to note that man stands helpless in the middle of the 
stream of becoming, which he can neither check nor con- 
trol ; that he is bound to toss about in the dark unfathom- 
able depths of samsara so long as he is possessed by the 
thirst for life ; and that in this restless world there is no 
possibility of peace. “It is not the time to discuss about 
fire, for those who are actually in burning fire, but it is 
the time to escape from it.” * 


X 

The Individual Self 

The dualism of body and mind is a part of becoming, 
a distinction of aspects in a whole ; for all things are 
related to each other as aspects of one continuous evolu- 
tion. While life is eternal it is not always bound up with 
consciousness. Any point in the universe becomes a point 
of reference in relation to which all other things in the 
universe may be conceived to be in motion, and when such 
a point of reference is also conscious, we call it an indivi- 
dual subject. Perception of the truth of things requires 
subjective centres. 

The individual subject is the empirical life of man, which 
grows and changes. The Upanisads declare emphatically 
that the true self of man is not to be identified with the 
body or the mental life which grows. Yet the union of 
mental and material qualities makes the individual. Every 
■ Majjhima Nikaya, vol. i., p. 29. 



ETHICAL IDEALISM OF BUDDHISM 383 


person as every thing is a synthesis, a compound. The 
Buddhists call it a samskara, an organisation. In all 
individuals, without exception, the relation of the com- 
ponent parts to one another is ever changing. It is never 
the same for two consecutive moments. Man is a living 
continuous complex, which does not remain the same for 
two moments, and yet continues in an endless number of 
existences without being completely different from itself. 1 
While both mind and body are in ceaseless change, imper- 
manence is more marked and the flow more rapid in mind 
than in body, so that if we wish to speak of anything as 
permanent it must be rather of body than of mind. 2 3 4 

Individuality is an unstable state of being which is 
ever growing. Rhys Davids says : “ There can be no 
individuality without putting together, there can be no 
putting together, no confection, without a becoming ; 
there can be no becoming without a becoming different ; 
and there can be no becoming different without a dissolu- 
tion, a passing away, which sooner or later will be inevi- 
tably complete.” 3 It is a perpetual process with nothing 
permanent. Nothing here is permanent, neither name 
nor form. 4 To the five ascetics of Isipatana in Benares, 
headed by Kondanna, the second sermon was delivered on 
the non-existence of the soul : “ The body is not the eternal 
soul, for it tends towards destruction. Nor do feeling, 
perception, disposition and intelligence together con- 
stitute the eternal soul, for were it so, it would not be the 
case that consciousness likewise tends towards destruction.” 
“ Our form, feeling, perception, disposition and in- 
telligence are all transitory, and therefore evil, and not 
permanent and good. That which is transitory, evil and 
liable to change, is not the eternal soul. So it must be 

1 See Mahaniddesa, p. 117 ; Visuddhimagga, viii ; W.B.T., p. 150. 

1 Samyutta Nikaya, ii. 94 and 95. According to the great text of the 
Hinayana Abhidharinamahavibhasasastra, a day of twenty-four hours 
contains six thousand four hundred millions ninety-nine thousand nine 
hundred and eight}' ksanas or moments, and the five skandhas are repeatedly 
produced and destroyed in every ksana. (See Yamakami Sogea : Systems 
0 / Buddhistic Thought, p. 11.) 

3 The Religious Systems of the World, p. 142. 

4 Mahavagga, i. vi. 38 fi. 



384 INDIAN PHILOSOPHY 

said of all physical forms whatsoever, past, present, or to 
be, subjective or objective, far or near, high or low : “ this 
is not mine, this I am not, this is not my eternal soul.” 1 
Dhammadinna in Veddallasutta says : “ The ignorant 

unconverted man regards the self as bodily form, or as 
something having a bodily form, or bodily form as being in 
the self, or the self as being in the bodily form ; or else he 
regards the self as feeling, or as something having feeling, 
or feeling as being in the self, or the self as being in the 
feeling.” The argument is repeated with the other skandhas. 
There is no self (or Atman) or person (pudgala) or living 
being (sattva) or principle of life (jiva) which is permanent. 
We have no consciousness of any such changeless entity 
or eternal principle in man. 2 We have only linkages of 
causes and effects. Man seems to be a complex composed 
of five skandhas. The theory of the skandhas is developed 
out of the namarupa of the Upanisads. Here our point 
is that besides constituent elements, rupa (the material) 
and nama (the mental), we seem to have nothing more. 

In the Surangama Sutta, Ananda’s pitiful attempts to 
locate the soul inside the body or outside it, behind the 
sense organs, etc., are discussed.3 We search in vain for a 
permanent soul in the substance of the brain, or the relics 
of sense, or the constituents of individuality. The postu- 
lation of an unconnected force called the soul seemed to 
the Buddhists to go against the law of karma, for people 
look upon the soul as a sort of jack-in-the-box, somehow 
the chief agent of all activities. According to Mrs. Rhys 
Davids : “ The anti-atta argument of Buddhism is mainly 
and consistently directed against the notion of a soul, 
which was not only a persistent unchanging, blissful trans- 
migrating superphenomenal being, but was also a being 
wherein the supreme Atman or world soul was immanent, 
one with it, in essence and as a bodily or mental factor 
issuing its fiat.” 4 The Atman of the Upanisads is, how- 
ever, not the transmigrating self. Another misconception 

1 Mahavagga, i. 21. * See Samyutta Nikaya, iv. 54. 

J Western psychologists indulge in such attempts to locate the soul 
in the body, nervous system, brain, and a particular point in it. 

* Buddhist Psychology, p. 31. 



ETHICAL IDEALISM OF BUDDHISM 385 


of the Upanifad definition of the soul repudiated by 
Buddha is that which regards the Atman as an abstract 
unity excluding all differences. If it is so, it is certainly 
a nonentity, as Indra said long ago. 

A different reason which led Buddha to be silent about 
the soul was the conviction that the master instinct to 
affirm the ordinary self is the hidden root of all spiritual 
evil. He repudiates the popular delusion of the individual 
ego and disputes the reality of the surface self. He is 
emphatic about the false views of self. The objects with 
which we identify ourselves are not the true self. “ Since 
neither self nor aught belonging to self, brethren, can 
really and truly be accepted, is not the heretical position 
which holds : ‘ this is the world and this is the self, and I 
shall continue to be in the future, permanent, immutable, 
eternal, of a nature that knows no change, yea, I shall 
abide to eternity,’ is not this simply and entirely a doctrine 
of fools ? ” 1 It is the false view that clamours for the 
perpetual continuance of the small self that Buddha refutes. 
We never remain the same for two moments together, 
and for what self is it then that we desire everlasting con- 
tinuance ? 1 Buddha repudiates the animism which pro- 
jects a self into every object. He denies the existence of 
the unknown substratum which some posit as the support 
of qualities, since its nature is hidden from us. This use- 
less occult, unknown and unknowable substance, Buddha 
rightly denies. Sometimes the liberated soul is conceived 
after the analogy of the human being. In his early 
wanderings Buddha approached the renowned sage Alara 
Kalama and became his disciple, learning the successive 
degrees of ecstatic meditation. Alara taught the view 
that the individual soul when it abolishes itself is set free. 
“ Having abolished himself by himself, he sees that naught 
exists, and is called a nihilist ; then, like a bird from its 
cage, the soul escaping from the body is declared to be 
set free ; this is that supreme Brahman constant, eternal, 
and without distinctive signs, which the wise who know 
reality declare to be liberation.” Buddha objected to this 

1 Majjhima. NiVaya, i. 13^. Cf iii. 27. 

1 See Inge : Proceedings of the Aristotelian Society, vol. xix. p. 2S4. 



386 INDIAN PHILOSOPHY 

doctrine on the ground that the liberated soul was still a 
soul ; whatever the condition it attained be, it was subject 
to rebirth, and the “ absolute attainment of our end is 
only to be found in the abandonment of everything.” 
Buddha clearly tells us what the self is not, though 
does not give any clear account of what it is. It is, how- 
ever, wrong to think that there is no self at all according 
to Buddha. “ Then the wandering monk Vacchagotta 
spake to the Exalted One, saying : ‘ How does the matter 
stand, venerable Gotama, is there the ego ? ’ When he 
said this, the Exalted One was silent. ‘ How then, vene- 
rable Gotama, is there not the ego ? ’ And still the 
Exalted One maintained silence. Then the wandering 
monk Vacchagotta rose from his seat and went away. 
But the venerable Ananda said to the Exalted One : 
‘ Wherefore, sire, has the Exalted One not given an answer 
to the questions put by the wandeiing monk Vacchagotta ?’ 
‘ If I, Ananda, when the wandering monk Vacchagotta 
asked me : “Is there the ego,” had answered : “ The ego 
is,” then that, Ananda, would have confirmed the doctxine 
of the Samanas and Brahmanas who believe in permanence. 
If I, Ananda, when the wandering monk Vacchagotta asked 
me : “Is there not the ego ? ” had answered : " The ego is 
not,” then that, Ananda, would have confirmed the doctrine 
of the Samanas and the Brahmanas, who believe in annihila- 
tion.’ ” About this dialogue Oldenberg remarks : “ If Buddha 
avoids the negation of the existence of the ego, he does 
so in order not to shock a weak-minded hearer. Through 
the shirking of the question as to the existence or non- 
existence of the ego is heard the answer to which the 
premises of the Buddhist teaching tended, the ego is not.” 1 
We cannot agree with this view that Buddha deliberately 
disguised the truth. Were Oldenberg correct, then nir vana, 
would mean annihilation, which Buddha repudiates. Nirvana 
is not a lapse into a void, but only a negation of the flux 
and a positive return of the self to itself. The logical con- 
clusion from this would be that something is, though it is 
not the empirical self. This is also in agreement with 
Buddha’s statement that the self is neither the same as 

* Luddha, p. 273. 



ETHICAL IDEALISM OF BUDDHISM 387 


nor entirely different from the skandhas. It is not a mere 
composite of mind and body, nor is it the eternal substance, 
exempt from the vicissitudes of change . 1 The discussion 
of the burden and its bearer makes out that the skandhas 
which are the burden and the pudgala which is the bearer 
are distinct entities. If they were identical, there is no 
need to distinguish between them. “ O, ye mendicants, I 
am going to point out to you the burden as well as the carrier 
of the burden : the five states are the burden and the pudgala 
is the carrier of the burden ; he who holds that there is no 
soul is a man with false notions.” 1 To be born is to take 
up the burden; to lay it down is to attain bliss or 
nirvana. 

Buddha emphasises the fact that we transcend experi- 
ence when we make assertions about the permanent soul 
behind phenomena. While agreeing with the Upanisads 
that the world of origination, decease, and suffering is not 
the true refuge of the soul, Buddha is silent about the 
Atman enunciated in the Upanisads. He neither affirms 
nor denies its existence. For so long as we swear by dry 
logic we cannot prove the reality of the soul as Atman. 
The unknowable Atman said to underlie our self is an 
inscrutable mystery. Some say it is, and it is open to 
others to say that it is not. Buddha exhorts us to be 
philosophical enough to recognise the limits of philosophy. 
A true psychology is possible only if we repudiate the 
metaphysical bias in favour of or against the soul. The 
psychologists of the middle of the nineteenth century 
tried to discuss psychological problems in the spirit of 
Buddha, even as physicists and biologists deal with their 
subject matter without defining matter or life. Buddha 
contents himself with a description of psychical phenomena, 
and does not venture to put forth any theory of the soul. 
Rational psychologists attempt to describe the nature of 

1 In Puggalapaiinatti we have a discussion of three principal theories 
regarding the nature of Atman : ^asvatavada, which holds that the soul 
truly exists in this life and the future ; the Ucchedavada, that the soul truly 
exists only in this life ; and the third theory that the soul does not exist 
m this life or the next. 

1 W.B.T., p. 161; Sarvabhisamayasutra quoted in Uddyotakara’s Nyaya- 
varttika, iii. I. i. 


VOL. I 


13 * 



388 INDIAN PHILOSOPHY 

the soul, its finiteness or otherwise . 1 To posit a soul seemed 
to Buddha to step beyond the descriptive standpoint. 
What we know is the phenomenal self. Buddha knows 
that there is something else. He is never willing to admit 
that the soul is only a combination of elements, but he 
refuses to speculate on what else it may be. 

The Upanisads arrive at the ground of all things by 
stripping the self of veil after veil of contingency. At 
the end of the process they find the universal self which 
is none of these finite entities, though the ground of them 
all. Buddha holds the same view, though he does not 
state it definitely. He denies the immortality of the fleet- 
ing elements which constitute the complex empirical indi- 
vidual. He denies the unphilosopliical or the theological 
view sometimes put forward in the Upanisads that the 
Atman is of the size of a thumb, which is said to escape 
from the body at death through an aperture in the suture 

' The difference between the two positions is brought out in the follow- 
ing passage from one of our greatest living psychologists. Professor Stout : 
" It is a fact recognised explicitly or implicitly by everyone that the mani- 
fold and constantly changing experiences that enter into the life history 
of an individual mind are in some sense owned by a self or ego which remains 
one and the same throughout their vicissitudes. But when we begin to 
inquire into the precise nature of the unity and identity ascribed to the 
self and the precise sense in which its experiences belong to it, we are con- 
fronted with a fundamental divergence of views. On the one hand it is 
maintained that, just as the unity of a triangle, or of a melody, or of an 
organism consists merely in the special mode in which its parts are connected 
and correlated so as to form a specific kind of complex, so the unity of what 
we call an individual mind consists merely in the peculiar way in which 
what we call its experiences are united with each other. On this view, when 
we say that a desire is someone's desire we merely mean that it enters as 
one constituent among others into a connected totality of experiences, having 
a certain sort of unity and continuity which can belong to experiences only 
and not to material things. In opposition to this doctrine, it is strenuously 
maintained by others that the identical subject is not merely the unified 
complex of experience but the distinct principle from which they derive 
their unity, a something which persists through them and links them 
together. According to these writers it is an inversion of the truth to say 
that the manifold experiences through their union with each other form a 
single self. On the contrary, it is only through their relation to the single 
self as a common centre that they are united with each other. Of these 
two conincting theories 1 feel bound to accept the first and reject the second. 
The unity of the self seems to me indistinguishable from the unity of the 
total complex of its experiences." [borne Fundamental Faints in the theory 
of Knowledge, p. 6.) 



ETHICAL IDEALISM OF BUDDHISM 389 


of the skull. He also allows that the subject self is inde- 
monstrable. Our introspection cannot seize it, yet we 
must assume it, for it is the subject that sees all else. With- 
out it we cannot account for even the empirical self. Train 
of ideas, bundle, heap, collection are all metaphors, and 
involve a unifying agency. Without this immanent principle 
the life of man becomes inexplicable. So Buddha con- 
sistently refuses to deny the reality of the soul. Ancient 
Buddhist thinkers noticed this apparently uncertain atti- 
tude of Buddha towards the question of the self, and some 
have held that Buddha taught from motives of expediency 
both the existence and the non-existence of the self. 

Nagarjuna, in his commentary on the Prajnaparamita 
Sutra, says : “ The Tathagata sometimes taught that the 
Atman exists, and at other times he taught that the Atman 
does not exist. When he preached that the Atman exists 
and is to be the receiver of misery or happiness in the 
successive lives as the reward of its own karma, his object 
was to save men from falling into the heresy of nihilism 
(ucchedavada). When he taught that there is no Atman 
in the sense of a creator or a perceiver or an absolutely 
free agent, apart from the conventional name given to the 
aggregate of the five skandhas, his object was to save men 
from falling into the opposite heresy of eternalism (sasva- 
tavada). Now, which of these two views represents the 
truth ? It is doubtless the doctrine of the denial of Atman. 
This doctrine, which is so difficult to understand, was not 
intended by Buddha for the ears of those whose intellect 
is dull and in whom the root of goodness has not thriven. 
And why ? Because such men, by hearing the doctrine of 
an-Atman, would have been sure to fall into the heresy of 
nihilism. The two doctrines were preached by Buddha 
for two very different objects. He taught the existence of 
Atman when he wanted to impart to his hearers the con- 
ventional doctrine ; he taught the doctrine of an-Atman 
when he wanted to impart to them the transcendental 
doctrine.” 1 

1 Similarly, Dharmapalacarya says in bis commentary on the Vijfiana- 
matrasastra : “ The existence of the Atman and of the dharmas, i.e. of 
the ego and of the phenomenal world, is affirmed in the sacred canon only 



390 


INDIAN PHILOSOPHY 


XI 

Nagasena’s Theory of Self 

When we pass from the direct teaching of Buddha to 
its interpretation by Nagasena and Buddhaghosa a nega- 
tive complexion is cast over the silence or the agnosticism 
of the original teaching of Buddha. Buddhist thought is 
torn away from its ancestral stem and planted in a purely 
rational soil. The logical results of the philosophy of 
becoming are drawn out with rigour. Phenomenalistic 
doctrines which remind us of Hume are developed with 
great skill and brilliance. Buddha makes psychology the 
fundamental discipline from and through which meta- 
physical problems are to be approached. Our attention 
according to him should shift from the absolute mind of 
metaphysical speculation to the human mind of psycho- 
logical observation. Human consciousness apparently is the 
playground of rising and vanishing ideas. With his eye 
for the continual change and movement of ideas and con- 
sciousness and insistence on the exact method of psycho- 
logical observation, Nagasena dismisses the immortal soul 
as an illegitimate abstraction, and reduces the self of man 
to a unified complex exhibiting an unbroken historical 
continuity. In him, therefore, the negative position of the 
non-existence of the soul is explicitly affirmed. He even 
goes to the length of saying that his designation Nagasena 
indicates nothing permanent . 1 Things are names, con- 
cepts perhaps. Chariot is a name as much as Nagasena. 
There is nothing beneath the properties more real. The 

provisionally and hypothetically, and never in the sense of their possessing 
a real and permanent nature.” Aryadeva, too, the most prominent of 
Kagarjuna's disciples, says in his commentary on the Madhyamikasastra : 
" The Buddhas, in their omniscience, watch the natures of all living beings 
and preach to them the Good Law in different ways, sometimes affirming 
the existence of the Atman and at other times denying it. Without an 
adequate development of one’s intellectual powers, no one can attain 
nirvana, nor can one know why evil should be eschewed. It is for the 
people who have not reached this stage that the Buddhas preach the 
existence of Atman." (See Yamakami Sogen : Systems of Buddhistic 
Thought, pp. 19—20.) 

* Milmda, li. i. i. 



ETHICAL IDEALISM OF BUDDHISM 391 


immediate data of consciousness do not bear out the 
existence of any unity which we can imagine. 

" And Milinda began by asking, ‘ How is your Reverence known, 
and what, sir, is your name ? ’ 

“ ‘ I am known as Nagasena, O king, and it is by that name that 
my brethren in the faith address me, yet this is only a generally under- 
stood term, a designation in common use. For there is no permanent 
individuality (no soul) involved in the matter.’ 

“ Then Milinda called upon the Yonakas and the brethren to 
witness : ‘ This Nagasena says there is no permanent individuality 
(no soul) implied in his name. Is it now even possible to approve 
him in that ? ’ And turning to Nagasena, he said : ' If there be no 
permanent individuality (no soul) involved in the matter, who is it, 
pray, that gives to you members of the Order your robes and food and 
lodging and necessaries for the sick ? Who is it that enjoys such 
things when given ? Who is it that lives a life of righteousness ? 
Who is it who devotes himself to meditation ? Who is it who attains 
to the goal of the Excellent Way, to the nirvana of Arhatship ? And 
who is it who destroys living creatures ? Who is it who takes what 
is not his own ? Who is it who lives an evil life of worldly lusts, who 
speaks lies, who drinks strong drink, who (in a word) commits any one 
of the five sins which work out their bitter fruit even in this life ? 
If that be so, there is neither merit nor demerit ; there is neither 
doer nor causer of good or evil deeds ; there is neither fruit nor result 
of good or evil karma. If, most reverend Nagasena, we are to think 
that were a man to kill you there would be no murder, then it follows 
that there are no real masters or teachers in your Order, and that your 
ordinations are void. . . . You tell me that your brethren in the 
Order are in the habit of addressing you as Nagasena. Now what is 
that Nagasena ? Do you mean to say that the hair is Nagasena ? ' 

" ' I don’t say that, great king.’ 

“ ‘ Or the hairs on the body, perhaps ? ’ 

Certainly not.’ 

“ ‘ Or is it the nails, the teeth, the skin, the flesh, the nerves, or the 
brain, or any or all of these, that is Nagasena ? ’ 

" And to each of these he answered no. 

" ‘ Is it the outward form then (rupa) that is Nagasena, or the 
sensations (vedana), or the ideas (samjna), or the syntheses, the con- 
stituent elements of character (samskara), or the consciousness 
(vijnana) that is Nagasena ? ’ 

“ And to each of these he answered no. 

" ' Then is it all these skandhas combined that are Nagasena ? ' 

" ‘ No, great king.’ 

" ‘But is there anything outside the five skandhas that is Naga- 
sena ? ’ 

“ And stdl he answered no. 



392 


INDIAN PHILOSOPHY 


“ ‘ Then thus, ask as I may, I can discover no Nagasena. Nagasena 
is a mere empty sound. Who then is the Nagasena that we see before 
us ? ' 

“ And the venerable Nagasena asked Milinda the king : ‘ Did 

your Majesty come here on foot, or in a chariot ? 

“ ‘ I did not come on foot ; I came in a chariot.’ 

" ‘ Then if you came, sire, in a chariot, explain to me what that 
is. Is it the pole that is the chariot ? ’ 

“ * I did not say that.’ 

" ‘ Is it the axle that is the chariot ? ' 

“ * Certainly not.’ 

“ ' Is it the wheels, or the framework, or the ropes, or the yoke, ©x 
the spokes of the wheels, or the goad, that are the chariot ? ’ 

" And to all these he still answered no. 

“ ‘ Then is it all these parts of it that are the chariot ? * 

" * No, sir.’ 

" ' But is there anything outside them that is the chariot ? 

" And still he answered no. 

“ ' Then thus, ask as I may, I can discover no chariot. Chariot 
is a mere empty sound. What then is the chariot you say you came 
in ? ’ And he called upon the Yonakas and the brethren to witness, 
saying : ' Milinda the king here has said that he came in a chariot. 
But when asked in that case to explain what the chariot was, he is 
unable to establish what he averred. Is it, forsooth, possible to 
approve him in that ? ’ 

“ And Milinda said : ' I have spoken no untruth, reverend sir. It 
is on account of its having all these things — the pole and the axle, 
the wheels and the framework, the ropes and the yoke, the spokes and 
the goad — that it comes under the generally understood term, the 
designation in common use, of " chariot.” ’ 

“ ‘ Very good. Your Majesty has rightly grasped the meaning of 
" chariot.” And just so it is on account of all those tilings you ques- 
tioned me about, the thirty-two kinds of organic matter in a human 
body, and the five constituent elements of being — that I come under the 
generally understood term, the designation m common use, of “ Naga- 
sena.’' For it was said, sire, by our Sister Vagira in the presence 
of the Blessed One : “ Just as it is by the condition precedent of the 
co-existence of its various parts that the word ' chariot ’ is used, just 
so is it that when the skandhas are there we talk of a ’being.’”’ ” 1 

From the silence of Buddha on the question of the “soul,” 
Nagasena drew his negative inference that there was no 
soul. The word self is dropped altogether, and only states 
of self are spoken of. The self is a stream of ideas. The 
several states of self possess a common character, and we 
abstract this common element and call it the self or Atman. 

1 Milinda, n. i. i. 



ETHICAL IDEALISM OF BUDDHISM 393 


If it is argued that there is such a thing as consciousness 
of self or the intuition of self, the Buddhists reply that it 
is a psychological impossibility. As when we deal with 
things like chariot, etc., we imagine something underlying 
the properties, even so do we unjustly imagine a soul 
underlying mental states. / The idea of a soul when analysed 
comes to this, that certakn qualities exist together. As 
body is a name for a system of qualities, even so soul is a 
name for the sum of the states which constitute our 
mental existence . 1 Without the qualities there is no soul, 
as there is no river without the two banks, the water and 
the sand, and no chariot without the wheels, the poles, 
the axle and the body.* 

Nagasena recognises the distinction between thoughts 
and things. In every individual he admits there are nama 
and rupa, mind and body. Only mind is not a permanent 
self any more than body is a permanent substance. Ideas, 
states, modifications come and go, attract us for a while, 
occupy our attention, and then disappear. We imagine 
that there is a permanent self which binds all our states 
and preserves them all, but this assumption is not justified 
by actual experience. ; In the manner of Hume he argues 
that we do not find anywhere in our experience anything 
answering to the conception of self. We do not perceive 
anything simple and continuous. Any idea which has no 
corresponding impression is an unreality. Things are what 
they are perceived to be. ) “ For my part, when I enter 
most intimately into what ' I call myself, I always stumble 
on some particular perception or other, of heat or cold, 
light or shade, love or hatred, pain or pleasure. I never 
can catch myself at any time without a perception and 
never can observe anything but the perception. When 

1 ** The very existence of ideas constitutes the soul,” according to 
Berkeley, though this does not represent his later view. (Works, vol. iv. t 
P- 434-) 

J The Bodhisattva said to a pilgrim : “ Will you have a drink of Ganges 
water fragrant with the scent of the forest ? ” The pilgrim gives the answer 
back in the words : ” What is the Ganges ? Is the sand the Ganges ? Is 
the water the Ganges ? Is the nether bank the Ganges ? Is the further 
bank the Ganges ? ” The Bodhisattva retorted : ” If you except the water, 
the sand, the hither bank and the further bank, where can you find any 
Ganges ? * (Jdiaka Tales, No. 244 .) 



394 


INDIAN PHILOSOPHY 


my perceptions are removed for any time as by sound 
sleep, so long am I insensible of myself, and may truly be 
said not to exist. And were all my perceptions removed 
by death, and could I neither think nor feel, nor see, nor 
love, not hate, after the dissolution of my body, I should 
be entirely annihilated, nor do I conceive what is further 
requisite to make me a perfect nonentity. If any one, 
upon serious and unprejudiced reflection, thinks he has a 
different notion of himself, I must confess I can reason no 
longer with him. All I can allow him is, that he may be 
in the right as well as I, and that we are essentially 
different in this particular. He may, perhaps, perceive 
something simple and continued which he calls himself, 
though I am certain there is no such principle in me. 
But setting aside some metaphysicians of this kind, I 
venture to affirm of the rest of mankind that they are 
nothing but a bundle or collection of different perceptions, 
which succeed each other with an inconceivable rapidity, 
and are in a perpetual flux and movement. Our eyes 
cannot turn in their sockets without varying our percep- 
tions. Our thought is still more variable than our sight, 
and all our other senses and faculties contribute to this 
change ; nor is there any single power of the soul which 
remains unalterably the same, perhaps for one moment.” 1 
Again, a little further on, Hume writes : “ What we call 
mind is nothing but a heap or bundle of different percep- 
tions united together by certain relations, and supposed, 
though falsely, to be endowed with a certain simplicity and 
identity.” Nagasena, like Hume, feels himself to be under 
an intellectual obligation to regard all terms as jargon to 
which no imaginable meaning could be attached, and so is 
obliged to dispense with the subtle soul which to him 
expresses an impossible meaning. What is not felt is not 
real. We know only that there is suffering, but not that 
there is a subject that suffers . 1 Nagasena rightly says that 


1 Hume’s Works, vol. i„ pp. 3 fi. 

* M. Taine remarks : " There is nothing in ego except the train of its 
events.” Soul, according to Voltaire, is a " vague, indefinite term for an 
unknown principle of effects, known and felt by us, which has generally been 
taken for the origin or cause of life, or for life itself.” 



ETHICAL IDEALISM OF BUDDHISM 395 


he does not know the self substance, that in which the 
qualities inhere according to Descartes, the unknown sup- 
port of Locke. We have no idea of it, and we cannot pre- 
sume to give any intelligible account of its relation to the 
qualities which it is supposed to support. ') Modern psy- 
chology has made the expression psychology without a 
soul, first used by Lange, current coin, and admits that 
soul is only a label attached to the bundle of sensations, 
emotions and sentiments. William James considers the 
term soul to be a mere figure of speech to which no 
reality corresponds. “ The word explains nothing and 
guarantees nothing, its successive thoughts are the only 
intelligible things about it.” Some realists who approach 
the problems of philosophy in the scientific spirit of early 
Buddhism do not accept the theory of the soul . 1 The 
notion of an inner principle different from and mysteriously 
related to outer responses is considered a superstition. 
Non-empirical explanatory essences are all eliminated. Self, 
then, is a generic idea standing for a collection of mental 
states. It is a sum total of conscious contents . 2 Nagasena 
is perfectly logical. If we do not, with Plato, hold that 
behind every individual being like chariot there is a uni- 
versal lurking, we need not think that the complex man 
has a self behind him. 

If sense is for us the measure of the universe, then experi- 
ence becomes the feeling of each moment. Self is nothing 
more than an isolated momentary perception. The life of 
self, or what we popularly call mind, lasts only so long as 
the indivisible, momentary consciousness lasts.' Accord- 
ing to William James, the pulse of the present moment is 
the real subject. “ Consciousness may be represented as 
a stream. . . Things which are known together are 


1 Perry: Philosophical Tendencies, pp. 271 fi. 

* It is said in Visuddhimagga : " Just as the word chariot is but a mode 
of expression for axle, wheels and other constituent members, placed in a 
certain relation to each other, but when we come to examine the members 
one by one, we discover that in an absolute sense there is no chariot ; just 
as the words house, fist, lute, army, city, tree, are only modes of expression 
for collections of certain things disposed in a certain manner, in exactly 
the same way the words living being and ego are only modes of expression 
for a complex of bodily and non-bodily constituents.” 



390 


INDIAN PHILOSOPHY 


known in single pulses of that stream.” The real subject 
“ is not an enduring being ; each subject lasts but for a 
moment. Its place is immediately taken by another which 
exercises its function, that is, to act as the medium of unity. 
The subject for the time being knows and adopts its pre- 
decessor, and by so doing appropriates what its predecessor 
adopted.” 1 The self logically becomes a transitory state 
of consciousness. Each conscious phenomenon called the 
mind is not a modification of any eternal mind stuff or 
the appearance of an Atman, but only a highly complex 
compound constantly changing and giving rise to new 
combinations. On this view we cannot account for the 
relative permanence and unity of experience. Bertrand 
Russell states that there is an empirically given relation 
between two experiences which constitutes their being 
what is commonly called experiences of the same person, 
and we might therefore regard the person simply as the 
particular series of experiences between which this relation 
holds, dispensing with him altogether as a metaphysical 
entity. There is continuity, but no identity. The con- 
sciousness of two successive moments have no substantial 
identity; What is felt in the previous moment is already 
dead and gone, and even as we think our experiences flit 
away. Each state is an isolated individual, appearing for 
a moment and immediately vanishing, giving place to 
another, which has a similar fate. The impression of con- 
tinuity is produced by the close crowding in of impres- 
sions, even as the continuity of a circumference is made 
up of a number of small points. Russell is of opinion 
that each of us is not one man but an infinite series of men, 
of whom each exists just for one moment. In successive 
states of consciousness we are different beings, and even 
continuity of existence between them is hard to compre- 
hend. When the one is present, the other is irrevocably 
dead and gone. How can even the past condition the 
present ? 1 The emphasis on the continuity as well as the 


* Principles of Psychology . 

* In the very useful introductory essay Mr. Aung has prefixed to his 

translation of Anuruddha’s Abh'dhammattha-Safigaha, he sums up Ani- 
ruddha’s explanation of the phenomenon of memory in tlmse words : Each 



ETHICAL IDEALISM OF BUDDHISM 397 


transitoriness of mental states seems to be inconsistent. 
The persistence of the past in the present involved in the 
law of karma is not accounted for. 

/The mysterious soul refuses to be eliminated. Acts of 
perception and memory become impossible without it. 
We cannot rightly define a perception and cannot know 
even that consciousness is a succession. If mind is only 
successive perceptions, there is nothing that perceives. 
One perception cannot perceive another, j The greatest 
contribution of Kant to modern thought is the principle 
that the different kinds of empirical consciousness must be 
connected in one self-consciousness. This is the basis of 
all knowledge, whether of ourselves as individuals or of the 
world as systematically connected according to law. Know- 
ledge implies the determination of the successive feelings 
by a subject not in the succession. Without the synthesis 
of self, experience would remain a mere rhapsody of dis- 
tinct perceptions and would never become knowledge. An 
experience in which we have only feelings one after another 
is not an experience of objects at all. This central truth 
of all idealism was enunciated in unambiguous terms some 
centuries before Kant by the great Indian philosopher 
Samkara. Samkara criticises the doctrine of momentariness 
or ksanikavada in his commentary on the Vedanta 
Sutras . 1 He argues that our consciousness cannot be 
momentary since it belongs to a permanent individual. If 
an individual does not exist, then recognition and memory 


mental state is related to the next in at least four different modes of rela- 
tion (paccaya) : proximity (anantara), contiguity (samanantara) , absence 
(n'atthi) and abeyance (avigata). This fourfold correlation is understood 
to mean that each expired state renders service (upakara) to the next. In 
other words, each, on passing away, gives up the whole of its energy (paccaya- 
satti) to its successor. Each successor, therefore, has all the potentialities 
of its predecessors and more. This being so, the mental element or the 
principle of recognition or perception (sanna) in each of the mental states 
that take part in a memory process, with all its heritage of the past, is a 
recognising under favourable circumstances, in the image reproduced or 
the idea revived of the original object by the very marks which were observed 
by its predecessors in a certain intuition or reflection. Thus the subject 
has come to regard the image as the copy, and the idea as the counterpart 
of the original object intuited or reflected upon ” (p. 14). 

1 ii. 2. ia-32. 



398 INDIAN PHILOSOPHY 

become unintelligible. If it is said that these phenomena 
do not require a permanent individual, for what happens 
at one moment may be recalled at another distinct moment, 
even as we recollect to-day what we did yesterday, 
Samkara says, then our judgments would always remain. 
“ I remember that somebody did something yesterday,” 
and not as they actually run, “ I remember that I did a 
particular thing yesterday.” It may be said that the 
consciousness of identity is illusory, for between a momentary 
cognition of yesterday and another such cognition of to-day 
there is a similarity which we wrongly interpret as an 
identity of the perceiving consciousness. But such an 
argument will not hold, since we cannot make a judgment 
of similarity if there are not two things, and if the momentari- 
ness doctrine is true, we cannot admit the existence of two 
things. It follows that we must admit the permanence of 
the perceiving consciousness, since there is no other way in 
which the past cognition and the present may be held 
together and compared, so that a judgment of similarity 
may result. If the past is to be recognised in the present, 
the permanence of the percipient is necessary. Even if 
such recognition be admitted to be based on similarity, 
the recognition of the similarity itself requires the identity 
of the subject. Again, we cannot admit that the judgment 
of similarity explains everything. When I say I recognise 
the man I met yesterday, I do not mean that my cogni- 
tion is similar to the cognition of the previous day’s, but 
that the objects of the two are identical. Mere similarity 
is inadequate to explain the experience of recognition. 
Besides, there is no possibility of doubting our own selves. 
Even if I doubt whether what I see to-day is the same as 
what I saw yesterday, I never doubt whether I that see 
something to-day am the same self that saw something 
yesterday. Thus Samkara argues against the momentari- 
ness view as applied to the perceiving subject, and contends 
that without a subject no synthesis, no knowledge, no 
recognition is possible . 1 

j Nagasena did not raise the question of knowledge and 
so evaded these problems. Otherwise he would have 
« Commentary on, ii. a. 25. 



ETHICAL IDEALISM OF BUDDHISM 399 


realised that the two terms subject and object, between 
which the knowledge relation holds, cannot stand for the 
same thing. 


XII 

Psychology 

Whatever may be the view of the metaphysical reality 
of the soul, the Buddhists as a class attempt to deal with 
the individual life without any reference to a permanent 
self, for even if it has any meaning it seems to be too 
recondite to be of any service to us. We have now to 
notice the Buddhist analysis of the self. “ When one says 
‘ I,’ what he does is that he refers either to all the skandhas 
combined or any one of them, and deludes himself that that 
was ‘ I.’ ” 1 The being which undergoes existence is a com- 
posite one formed of skandhas or aggregates, which are five 
in number for human beings and fewer for others. The 
mind has the unity of a system. 2 It is a composite of mental 
forces. 

The elements of individuality are distinguished into 
two broad divisions, nama and rupa. Even in the Upani- 
sads these constitute the phenomenal self. Through them 
the pure being of Brahman is spread out in the objective 
sphere. Nama answers to the mental and rupa to the 
physical factors. 3 Body and mind are viewed as mutually 
dependent ; “ whatever is gross is form or rupa ; whatever 
is subtle is nama. The two are connected one with the 
other, and therefore they spring into being together. As a 
hen does not get a yoke or an egg shell separately but 
both arise in one, the two being intimately dependent one 
on the other ; just so, if there were no nama, there would 
be no form. What is meant by nama in that expression 

1 Samyutta Nikaya, iii. 130. 

1 Dr. McDougall writes : “ We may fairly define a mind as an organised 
system of mental or purposive forces." — ( Psychology .) 

3 “ It is called rupam because it manifests, rupyati” (Samyutta Xikaya, 
iii. 86). What reveals itself to the senses is called rupam. It is used to refer 
to matter and material qualities, objects perceived, and what Mrs. Rhys 
Davids calls “ realms of attenuated matter." See her Editorial Note in 
Buddhaghosa’s Atthasalini, E.T. See also W.B.T., pp. 184 ff , where it is made 
to include the four elements, the body, the senses, and even the sensations. 



400 


INDIAN PHILOSOPHY 


being intimately dependent on what is meant by form, 
they spring up together. And this is, through time imme- 
morial, their nature.” 1 The Buddhists, along with Indian 
psychologists in general, believe in the material or organic 
nature of mind or manas. 

As to the distinction between the outer and the inner, 
the objective and the subjective, the following passage is 
pertinent : “ Which are the states which are ajjhatta 

(personal, subjective, internal) ? Those states which for 
this or that being, related to the self, to the individual, 
to one’s own, are referred to the person . . . and w’hich 
are the states that are bahiddha (non-personal, objective 
and external) ? Those states which for this or that other 
being, for other individuals, related to the self, to the indi- 
vidual, to one’s own, are referable to the person.” All 
are dharmas or mental presentations, ideas in Locke’s 
sense, whatever is the immediate object of perception, 
thought or understanding. The individuality of man, con- 
sisting of both rupa and nama, body and mind, is said to 
be a congeries of mental states. In Book I of Dhamma- 
sangani those mental states or dharmas which reveal the 
nature of mind or nama, the states of internal sense, are 
discussed. In Book II the states revealing the rupa or 
the outer world, the products of external sense, are given. 
Dharma is a comprehensive term including the objects of 
external and internal senses. The phenomena of the 
wcrld are divided into two classes : (i) Rupino, having 

form, the four elements and their derivatives ; (2) arupino, 
not having form, modes or phases of consciousness, i.e. the 
skandhas of feeling, perception, synthesis and intellect. 
Rupa means at first sight the extended universe as distinct 
from the mental one, the world seen as distinct from the 
unseen mind, the arupino. Slowly it comes to signify the 
worlds in which it is possible for us to have rebirth, for 
these are also capable of being seen. It is well for us to 
note that the early Buddhist did not care to carry his 
researches deeper, since his main interest was ethical. He 
argued to the nature of the external w'orld from the physical 
basis of his own being. 


• Milinda, 2 . 8. 



ETHICAL IDEALISM OF BUDDHISM 401 

Nama, the mental, includes citta, heart or emotion, 
vijnana, or consciousness, and manas, or mind. We have 
also as a division of namarupa the five skandhas, which 
are: (i) Rupa, material attributes; (2) Vedana, feeling; 
(3) Samjna, perception ; (4) Samskaras, or mental dispo- 
sitions and will; (5) Vijnana, or reason. These terms are 
not used with any strict connotation. They constitute the 
complex grouping of self. Cetana or will has a number of 
co-efficients. “ Samskara ” includes a miscellaneous host 
of tendencies, intellectual, affectional and volitional, and has 
for its specific function synthesis. Vijnana is intelligence 
which comprehends abstract contents. 1 It is not conditioned 
by sense contact, while feelings, perceptions and dispositions 
are. 

The scheme, which shows a pretty high development 
of the power of introspective analysis, agrees with modern 
psychology in fundamentals. It recognises broadly the 
distinction between body and mind, the physical and the 
psychical aspects of the individual. In the psycho-physical 
organism, the part that is relatively stable is the body, or 
rupakaya, and the unstable one is the mind. On the mental 
side we have perception, conception, feeling or affection 
and conation or will. The first three can be easily traced 
to Saihjna and Vedana, and Vijnana. Vedana is affectional 
reaction. 2 It is mental experience, awareness and enjoy- 
ment, and has the three qualities of pleasant, painful and 
neutral, resulting from contact with objects of sense, and 
itself producing tahha, craving or desire. Samjna is the 
recognition of the general relations as well as the percep- 
tion of all kinds, sensuous and mental . 3 We have here dis- 
tinct cognition. The series of cognitions called cittasamtana 
goes on uninterruptedly through the successive existences. 

‘ It has eighty-nine subdivisions, and comprises the distinct consciousness 
of what is transmitted through the organs of seeing, hearing, smelling, tasting, 
touching, and the sixth sense, manas, as well as the discrimination of good, 
bad and indifferent. These aggregates with their sub-divisions, 193 in 
number, exhaust all the elements, material, intellectual and moral, of the 
individual. See Khys Davids : Buddhism, pp. 90-93 ; Aniruddha, Com- 
pendium of Philosophy, Pali Text Series, pp. 16, 88. 

* Milmda, ii. 3. 10. See also Bnddhaghosa’s Atthasahnl, E.T., p. 54. 

i Milmda, ii. 3. 11. 



402 INDIAN PHILOSOPHY 

The object of consciousness may be either an object of sense 
or of thought. 

According to Buddhagho§a, consciousness first comes 
into touch with its object, and then perception, feeling and 
volition arise. It is, however, not possible to break up the 
unitary conscious state into several successive stages answer- 
ing to feeling, perception, etc. “ In one whole conscious- 
ness, it cannot be said that this comes first and that next.” 1 
It is interesting to know that Buddhaghosa looked upon 
Vedana or feeling as the most complete awareness and 
enjoyment of the object . 1 

We may here notice the theory of sense perception of the 
early Buddhists. The visual sensation of the blue image 
arises when the colour blue which is given and the organ 
of the eye meet. Sometimes a distinction is drawn between 
hetu, cause, and pratyaya, or condition ; while the visual 
sensation is conditioned by the eye and the object, the 
blue colour, it is said to be caused by the preceding cogni- 
tion. The objects of sense are of five classes : sight, sound, 
smell, taste and touch. Buddhaghosa distinguishes these 
into asampattarupa, or those where the organism does not 
come into contact with the objective sources of the objects, 
as sight and sound, and sampattarupa, smell, taste, etc., 
which are only modifications of touch. Democritus regarded 
all sensation as touch or its development. The fivefold 
objects are called pancarammana. When the organ and 

1 Atthasalinl, pp. 143-144. 

1 Feeling " has (I) experiencing as characteristic, (2) enjoying as function, 

(3) taste of the mental properties as manifestation, and (4) tranquillity as 
proximate cause. (1) There is no such thing as feeling in the four planes 
of existence without the characteristic of experiencing. (2) If it be said 
that the function of enjoying the object is obtained only in pleasurable 
feeling, we reject that opinion and say : Let it be pleasurable feeling or 
painful feeling or neutral feeling, all have the function of enjoying (anu- 
bhavana) the object. As regards enjoying the taste of an object, the remain- 
ing associated states enjoy it only partially ; of contact there is (the function 
of) the mere touching, of perception the mere noting or perceiving, of voli- 
tion the mere co-ordinating, of consciousness the mere cognising. But 
feeling alone, through governance, proficiency, mastery, enjoys the taste 
of an object . . . therefore it is said that enjoyment or experience is 
its function. (3) The mere presence 01 feeling as such is referred 
to by calling its manifestation ' tasting a mental property ' (cetasika). 

(4) And inasmuch as a tranquillised body enjoys bliss or happiness, feeling 
has tranquillity as its proximate cause " (Atthasllinl, E.T., pp. 145-146). 



ETHICAL IDEALISM OF BUDDHISM 403 


the object come into contact sensation arises. As a' matter 
01 fact, the flux of consciousness is only “ the sequence of 
states of mind caused by the casual impact of sense and 
object. The phassa, or the contact, takes place ‘ as when 
two rams are butting together.’ The eye is one and the 
object another, and the compact is the union of the two.” 1 
The Dhammasangani holds that external phenomena are 
caused by the impinging on and modification of the internal 
or personal rupa by way of sense. There are other views 
which make the eye and the objects condition each other. 
Without the eye there is no visible world, and without a 
world no seeing eye . 3 

1 Milinda, ii. 3. 9 ; see also Majjhima, i. 3. 

2 Mrs. Rhys Davids gives the following summary of the account of sense 
perception contained in the Dhammasangani : 

A. The Senses. 

First, a general statement relating each sense in turn, (a) to nature (the 
four elements ; ( b ) to the individual organism and affirming its invisibility 
and its power of impact. 

Secondly, an analysis of the sensory process in each case, into — 

( а ) A personal agency or apparatus capable of reacting to an impact 
not itself. 

(б) An impinging " form ” or form producing an impact of one specific 
kind. 

(e) Impact between (a) and (6). 

(d) Resultant modification of the mental continuum, viz., in the first 
place, contact (of a specific sort) ; then hedonistic result, or intellectual 
result, or presumably both. The modification is twice stated in each case, 
emphasis being laid on the mutual impact, first as causing the modification, 
then as constituting the object of attention in the modified consciousness of 
the persons affected. 

B. The Sense-Objects. 

First, a general statement, relating each kind of sense-object in turn 
to nature, describing some of the typical varieties, and affirming its invisi- 
bility, except in the case of visual objects and its power of producing impact. 

Secondly, an analysis of the sensory process in each case as under A, 
but, as it were, from the side of the sense-object, thus : — 

(a) A mode of form or sense-object, capable of producing impact on 
special apparatus of the individual organism, 

[i) The impact of that apparatus. 

(c) The reaction or complementary impact of the sense-object. 

( d ) Resultant modification of the mental continuum, viz., in the first 
place contact (of a specific sort), then hedonistic result, or intellectual result, 
or presumably both. The modification is twice stated, in each case emphasis 
bung laid on the mutual impact, first as causing the modification, then as 
constituting the object of attention 111 the modified consciousness thus 
affected. ( Buddhist Psychology, pp. li.-hv.) 



404 INDIAN PHILOSOPHY 

The objects of thought are also of five classes : (i) Citta, 
mind ; (2) Cetasika, mental properties ; (3) Pasada rupa, 
sensitive qualities of the body, and sukuma rupa, subtle 
qualities of the body ; (4) Pannatti, name, idea, notion, 

concept ; (5) Nirvana. These are Dhammarammana, where 
Dhamma means the mental presentation. No definite 
account is given of the way in which sense experience is 
transformed into knowledge of meaning and ideas. It is 
said that the mind, which is regarded as a material organ, 
forms out of the sensations the intellectual ideas and notions. 
We do not know how it happens. Citta, which is both 
thing and thought, is said to work up the sensations into 
the concrete stream of consciousness. The seventh book 
of Abidhamma pitaka is called Patthana, or relations. The 
Buddhist recognises how all consciousness is a relation of 
subject and object. In all these processes we are assuming 
the activity of vijnana, the peculiar function of which is 
recognition, 1 which is a purely intellectual reaction. 

Conation or will of modern psychology cannot easily be 
traced in the Buddhist analysis. Yet it is quite as funda- 
mental and ultimate as cognition or affection. In the 
Buddhist theory, will is the most dominant aspect of con- 
sciousness, the basal element of human life. There is no 
ground to think that will in Buddhist psychology is a result- 
ant of the integration of the five skandhas. We may say 
that vijnana, vedana and samskara roughly correspond to 
knowledge, feeling and will. Childers in his dictionary 
brings the concepts answering to modern conation under 
samskaras. They include chando, desire, and viriyam, effort. 
This latter, according to Mrs. Rhys Davids, assists all other 
faculties. In Aristotle we find that conative effort is the 
vital element in appetite, passion, choice or will. Mrs. 
Rhys Davids is of opinion that though there are no indica- 
tions of a clearly developed psychology with its nice dis- 
tinctions between appetite, desire and choice, still we have 
the main lines between the psychological fact of willing 
and the ethical judgment of it clearly drawn. In the 
Pitakas she thinks there is a " pretty consistent discrimi- 
nation in the employment of terms connoting volition 

■ Milinda, ii. 3. 12 . 



ETHICAL IDEALISM OF BUDDHISM 405 


between psychological import only and ethical or moral 
implication. In two parallel passages in the Dhamma- 
sangani, for instance, the term which best conveys the 
meaning of bare simple conation or consciousness of energy, 
namely viriyam, as well as all its synonyms and comple- 
mentary terms — trying and striving, effort and endeavour, 
zeal and ardour, vigour and resistance, persistent striving, 
sustained desiring and exertion, grasping of a weight — is 
used to describe, in part, both the state or quality of mind 
which is morally good and that which is morally bad. To 
all such terms, then, when used of psychological activity. 
Buddhism attaches no blame any more than we should. 
When, on the other hand, the sacred writings wish to 
convey ethical values in terms of volitional import, either 
distinct and special words are used, or else the term of 
volition is explicitly qualified as referring to an object of 
perverted desires, or to a morbid state of will ; want or wish 
(akankha) becomes craving or thirst (tanha), for desire 
(chando) we get lust (chandorago), lusts of the flesh (kama- 
rago), sensual delight (nandirago), or else some qualifying 
phrase, desire for form (rupachando), and so forth.” 1 Every- 
thing is made a modification of will. Modern psychology 
emphasises the conative or purposive nature of all mental 
life. Sometimes the conation has a theoretical interest, 
sometimes practical. To adopt Professor Alexander's 
language : “ Theoretical acts of mind are such as subserve 
the continuance of the object before the mind without 
alteration of it. Practical acts are such as alter the objects.” 
Cognition and conation “ are not distinguishable elements 
in every psychosis, but every species of conation assumes 
two different forms, theoretical or practical, according to 
the different interests which the conation possesses .” 1 
Generally theory ends in practice. Cognitions are emi- 
nently practical. Buddhist psychology is right when in 
the doctrine of pratityasamutpada it says that perceptions 
excite desires. The object on which conation is directed 
may be sensed, perceived, imaged, remembered or thought. 
Cognition and will become the theoretical and practical 

1 J.R.A.S., 1898, p. 49. 

* British Journal of Psychology, ign, p. 244. 



406 INDIAN PHILOSOPHY 

varieties of conation. Physiological psychology adopts the 
sensory-motor circuit as the unit. Of it the afferent part 
answers to cognition, the efferent to the conative. The 
whole process is looked upon as one, and these two are 
distinguished in it as elements. Where all mental life is 
conational, will represents the active pursuit of the end, 
transforming it from an ideal into a reality. Even here the 
practical aspect is the dominant one. The theoretical cog- 
nition arises when the practical expression is arrested or 
inhibited. The mere joy of contemplation is also a cona- 
tive development where the practical interest is the delight 
itself. Feeling, again, is not independent of conation. It 
accompanies all acts. Professor Stout has given up the 
old tripartite classification of mental states and reverts to 
the ancient bipartite analysis of mind, bringing the affective 
and conational elements together under the name of interest 
as against the element of cognition. If we discard the 
separateness of cognition and make it the theoretical aspect 
of conation we get to the Buddhist emphasis on conation 
as the central fact of mental life. 

Though there is no transcendental Atman, its place, 
according to M. Poussin , 1 is taken by vijnana. That which 
passes from life to life is vijnana . 1 We are said to have 
vijnana santana, or continuum. This is not a permanent, 
unchanging, transmigrating entity, but a series of individual 
and momentary consciousnesses, a regular procession of 
states. The vijnana series is distinct from vedana, or feelings, 
and is autonomous and independent of physical processes. 

Buddhist psychology may best be described as associa- 
tionist. For each group of dharmas the antecedent facts 
which determine their appearance in consciousness are 
sought out according to certain laws, and explanations 
remarkable for that age are suggested. To the question 
why do we have particular ideas when particular impres- 
sions occur, Nagasena replies : " Because of their being a a 
incline, and because of their being a door, and because of 
their being a habit, and because of their being an associa- 
tion.” The incline is explained in terms which remind us 

■ Journal AsiaHque, 1902. This view is probably later than the pitakas. 

» \\ .B.T., p. 207. 



ETHICAL IDEALISM OF BUDDHISM 407 


of modern physiological psychology and its law of neural 
habit. “ When it rains, where will the water go to ? ” 
“ It will follow the slope of the ground.” " And if it were 
ho rain again, where would the water go to ? ” - “ It would 
go the same way as the first water had gone.” 1 Dr. 
McDougall writes : “ We have good reason to believe that 
the passage of impulse through a chain of neurones leaves 
that chain more or less permanently altered in such a way 
that its resistance to the passage of the impulse is in some 
degree diminished.” The path by which the discharge 
takes place becomes according to the law of neural habit 
one of lowered resistance. 2 The Buddhist explanation is, 
of course, a psychological insight, and not the result of a 
study of anatomy and physiology of the brain, sciences 
then, perhaps, hardly in existence. The conditions of recall 
are also mentioned. 

Speaking of the duration of mental states, it is said 
every state of consciousness has three phases : genesis 
(uppada), development (thiti), and dissolution (bhanga). 
Each of these occupies an infinitesimal division of time, 
an instant, a ksana. The space of three instants in which 
a state of consciousness becomes, exists and vanishes is 
called a cittaksana. Some Buddhists are of opinion that 
there is not even an instant for which the conscious state 
is steady. It simply grows and decays with no static 
interval, however infinitesimal it might be. Vissuddhi- 
magga says : " The being of a past moment of thought 
has lived, but does not live nor will it live. The being 
of a future moment will live, but has not lived nor does it 
live. The being of the present moment of thought does 
live, but has not lived nor will it live.” 3 

Every conscious state is said to be a disturbance of 
the stream of being w’hich is the flow of sub-conscious 
existence. Buddhist psychology recognised unconscious life. 
It is called vidhimutta, or free from process, as distinct 
from vidhicitta, or waking consciousness. The two are 
divided by the threshold of consciousness, the manodvara, 
or the door of mind. It is there where the stream of 

■ ii. 3. 7 . » Physiological Psychology, pp. 125-6, 

3 W.B.T., p. 150. 



408 INDIAN PHILOSOPHY 

simple being or bhavanga 1 is cut off or arrested. Bhavanga 
is subconscious existence, or more accurately existence free 
from waking consciousness. 2 3 

A consistent theory of phenomenalism cannot account 
for the elaboration of similar impressions into general 
notions or the cognisance of unity in diversity. Buddhist 
psychology gives us an analysis of mental states, but does 
not raise the question of the necessity of a subject in the 
process of attention, will, etc. It speaks of feelings and 
relations, but does not ask whether they can exist apart 
from a combining consciousness. The subject of activity 
according to the Buddhists is the sum total of the organic 
and mental dispositions and acts. " By name and form 
are deeds done,” and this of course is an ever changing 
composite. We are even told that we should not ask who 
experiences contact but only conditioned by what is their 
contact. 3 Our sense of individuality is an illusion. Yet 
we speak as if the “I” attains rebirth or reaches nirvana. 
Buddhaghosa explains it in this way : “ Just as in the 
case of those elements of being which go under the name 
of tree, as soon as at any point the fruit springs up, it is 
then said ' the tree bears fruit ’ or the ‘ tree has fructified,’ 
so also in the case of those groups which go under the name 
of ‘ god ’ or ‘ man,’ when a fruition of happiness or misery 
springs up at any point, then it is said that ‘ god ' or ‘ man ’ 
is happy or miserable.” 4 Though the present self may not 
be the past, it is yet the outcome of the past, the resultant 
of the series. 5 

1 Bhava, being ; anga, part. Bhavanga means both organic existence 
and subconscious existence. All is alive ; only in some cases rve have 
consciousness and in others not. 

* Nineteen kinds of bhavanga are distinguished. Of them ten are 
possible in kama loka, five in rupa loka and four in arupa loka. According 
to Mrs. Rhys Davids : " Consciousness is only an intermittent series of 
psychic throbs associated with a living organism, beating out their coming 
to know through one brief span of life ’’ ( Buddhist Psychology, p. 16). Bha- 
vahga is subconscious existence when subjectively viewed, though objectively 
it is sometimes taken to mean nirvana. 

3 See Samyutta Nikaya, ii. 13. 4 W.B.T., p. 241. 

5 “ When, O Great King, a man lights a candle, will not the candle burn 
through the night ? ” " Yes, sure, it will burn through the night." " How 

then, O Great King, is the flame, during the first watch of the night, the 
same that it is in the second watch '( " “ No, sir. . . . But the light burns 



ETHICAL IDEALISM OF BUDDHISM 409 


The conception of the soul retains enough meaning to 
make rebirth significant. The difficulty is that, if there 
be no permanent soul, then punishment has no meaning. 
At the time of the punishment the individual is no longer 
the same being who committed the crime. But there is 
enough identity to justify punishment. There is no 
metaphysical entity to justify punishment ; yet the 
individual is not a haphazard succession of unconnected 
phenomena but a living complex, a chain of causes and 
effects, physical, psychical and moral. The king asks 
Nagasena : “ He who is born, Nagasena, does he remain 
the same or become another ? ” “ Neither the same nor 

another.” " Give me an illustration.” “ Now, what do 
you think, O king, you were once a baby, a tender thing, 
and small in size, lying flat on your back, was that the same 
as you who are now grown up ? ” “ No. That child was 

one and I am another.” “ If you are not that child, it will 
follow that you have had neither mother nor father, no, 
nor teacher.” 1 The re-born man is not the dead man, 
yet not different from him. He arises from him. Every 
day we are new, and yet not quite new. There is persistent 
continuity as well as unceasing change. Buddhaghosa 
says : “ If taking any continuous series an absolute same- 
ness obtained, then, for example, sour cream could not 
arise from milk. And if there were absolute difference, 
the milk could not generate sour cream in the ordinary 
course of things.” There is neither absolute identity nor 
absolute difference. The whole is a series. The new 
creation is so immediate on the old that for all practical 
purposes it may be taken as the continuance of the same. 
There is a continuity of karma. Rebirth is new birth. 
Even in the Upanisads the unique ever-growing imper- 
manent self it is that wanders in the world of samsara and 
is the object of retributive justice. Rebirth requires the 
persistence of this ego. Through the conceptions of imper- 


the whole night adhering to the same matter.” " So also, O Great King, 
the chain of the elements of things is joined together. One element is always 
coming into being, another is always ceasing and passing away. Without 
beginning, without end, the change continues.” (Milinda ) 

‘ Milinda. 



410 INDIAN PHILOSOPHY 

manence and causality a dynamic conception of self is 
evolved. Each experience as it rises and passes leads up 
to or becomes or ends in another experience, moment or 
phase of life, which sums up the whole past. In terms 
suggestive of M. Bergson’s theory of memory, the Buddhists 
contend that there is no separate memory, for the whole 
past is contained in the present as a causative influence 
or force pursuing it throughout. “ That which we have 
felt, sought, willed from infancy is here now, bending over 
the present moment which goes merging into it, pressing 
against the gate of consciousness which would leave it 
without.” 1 The past bites into the present and leaves it? 
mark on it. 

XIII 

Pratityasamutpada, or the Doctrine of Dependent 

Origination 

The coming into being of life which is suffering, as well 
as its cessation, is accounted for by the doctrine of Prati- 
tyasamutpada. “ Then the Blessed One, during the first 
watch of the night, fixed his mind upon the chain of 
causation, in direct and in reverse order : ‘ From ignorance 
spring the sariiskaras (conformations), from the samskaras 
springs consciousness, from consciousness spring name 
and form, from name and form spring the six provinces 
(of the six senses, eye, ear, nose, tongue, body or touch 
and mind), from the six provinces springs contact, from 
contact springs sensation, from sensation springs thirst (or 
desire), from thirst springs attachment, from attachment 
springs becoming, from becoming springs birth, from birth 
spring old age and death, grief, lamentation, suffering, 
dejection and despair, Such is the origin of this whole 
mass of suffering. Again, by the destruction of ignorance, 
which consists in the complete absence of lust, the 
‘iam^karas are destroyed ; by the destruction of the 
samskaras, consciousness is destroyed ; by the destruction 
of consciousness, name and form are destroyed ; by the 
destruction of name and form, the six provinces are 

* Creative Ev . l p, 5, 



ETHICAL IDEALISM OF BUDDHISM 411 


destroyed ; by the destruction of the six provinces, con- 
tact is destroyed ; by the destruction of contact, sensa- 
tion is destroyed ; by the destruction of sensation, thirst 
is destroyed ; by the destruction of thirst, attachment is 
destroyed ; by the destruction of attachment, becoming 
is destroyed ; by the destruction of becoming, birth is 
destroyed ; by the destruction of birth, old age and death, 
grief, lamentation, suffering, dejection and despair are 
destroyed. Such is the cessation of this whole mass of 
suffering.’ ” 1 Warren believes that the “ full formula in 
its present shape is a piece of patchwork put together of 
two or more that were current in Buddha’s time.” It is 
based on the truths that man is bound to the wheel of 
life, and it is possible for him to free himself from these 
bonds by arresting the transitive character of causation. 
A view similar to this theory of the wheel of causation is 
suggested in the Upanisads. 2 The wheel of causation is 
sometimes distinguished into elements derived from the past 
life, those from the present and those of the future. 3 

The will to live is the ground of our existence. Its 
negation is our salvation. The greatest sin of man is to 
have been born, as Schopenhauer is fond of quoting from 
Calderon. It is this simple fact that is elaborated in the 


* Mahavagga, i. I. 1-3; S.B.E., xiii ; see also Milinda, ii. 3. 1. 

1 The eight fetters of the vital air, speech, tongue, eye, ear, mind, hands 
and skin and their auxiliaries, mentioned in the Upanisads (Brli , iii. 2), 
may be the basis of the doctrine. The word Brahmacakra, or the wheel 
of Brahma, occurs in the 6vetasvatara Upanisad (vi. 1). It is called in 
early Buddhism bhavacakra, or the wheel of existence. 

3 The following table brings out the distinction. See Majjhima Nikaya 
140 ; Mahapadana suttanta, ii. 

f Avidya, or ignorance. 

1. Those due to the past life Saniskaras, or predispositions or 

l tendencies. 

I" Vi j h ana, or consciousness of self. 
Numarupa, or mind and body. 
Sadayatana, or the sense organs. 
Sparsa, or contact. 

Yedana, or emotion. 

Tanha, or craving 

tUpadana, or clinging or attachment 

rBhava, or coming to be. 

3. Those of the future life < Jati, or rebirth. 

Uaramaratja, old age and death. 

14 


2. Those due to the present 
life 


VOL. I 



412 INDIAN PHILOSOPHY 

causal chain. It embodies the second great truth that 
suffering originates from desire, and sums up the conditions 
of existence. The Nidanas are the twelve successive causes 
where each one conditions the next. With the exception 
of the first, avidya, or ignorance, and the last, jaramarana, 
old age and death, the nidanas are called the ten karmas or 
acts. In early Buddhism, these are not so much substances 
as phases of being. There is no fixity about the number 
or order of the nidanas. In the doctrines of the pratltyasa- 
mutpada and the nidanas we find formulated a series of 
terms expressing the interrelated or mutually dependent 
order obtaining throughout the world of sentient existence. 

The first factor in this series is avidya, or ignorance. 
The false sense of " I ” is the central support of individual 
being. It is the bearer of karma as well as its breeder. 
Individuality is the product of avidya and karma, even as 
the flame is the fiery spark as well as the fuel that feeds 
it. Avidya hides the nature of life, which is sorrow . 1 The 
stress on ignorance is nothing peculiar to Buddhism. 
“ Things are what they are,” as Bishop Butler says, “ and 
the consequences of them will be what they will be ; why 
then should we desire to be deceived ? ” Yet we do 
deceive ourselves every day. Buddha asks us to face facts, 
know what they are and mean. It is ignorance consisting 
in assuming as real what is not, that produces the craving 
for life. It impels us to live and enjoy the world. The 
lust for life is considered by Buddha to be ignoble, stupid, 
moral bondage, one of the four mental intoxicants. If 
man is to be relieved from the misery of mundane existence, 
the false desire should be rooted out and the rage to live 
suppressed. Ignorance in early Buddhism is the cause of 
egoism, or the I-sense. It makes the individual feel him- 
self to be separate from the rest of existence, unrelated to 
the order of the world. We cling to our little self, struggle 
hard to perpetuate it, and continue it through all eternity . 2 

1 “ No world or thing here below ever fell into misery without having 
first fallen into folly.” (Carlyle, Latter-Day Pamphlets.) 

1 “ Men overlook the fact that they are really no more separate than 
a bubble in the foam of an ocean wave is separate from the sea, or than a 
cell in a living organism is separate from the organism of which it forms 
a part (Rhys The Religious Systems of the B'ofj. p. 1)4.) 



ETHICAL IDEALISM OF BUDDHISM 413 


Individual existence is an evil, desire is the outer expression 
of it. Men are unhappy simply because they are alive. 
The source of all sorrow is the affirmation of life. The 
force of ignorance is so great that in spite of the worst 
suffering men display a tenacious clinging to life. 

The second link in the chain is samskaras. The word 
samskara comes from a root which means to prepare or 
arrange. It stands for the product as well as for the 
process of making. It suggests how all things that are 
made have existence only in the making, how all being is 
becoming. Samskara is translated “ synthesis ” or “ con- 
formation.” It also means action, pure and impure, action 
possessing merit to be rewarded or guilt to be punished, 
here or hereafter. In the wide sense of the term it means 
the will force or the spirit energy which determines the 
new existence. In the Majjhima Nikaya we read : " It 

happens, my disciples, that a monk, endowed with faith, 
endowed with righteousness, endowed with knowledge of 
the doctrine, with resignation, with wisdom, communes 
thus with himself : ‘Now then could I, when my body is 

dissolved in death, obtain rebirth in a powerful princely 
family.’ He thinks this thought, dwells on this thought, 
cherishes this thought. These samskaras and internal con- 
ditions which he has thus cherished within him and 
fostered lead to his rebirth in such an existence. This, 
disciples, is the avenue, this the path which leads to rebirth 
in such an existence.” The train of thought is repeated 
with reference to the several classes of men and gods until 
its application is made to the highest condition of nirvana. 
The samskara may also be for the abolition of all samskaras 
or the gaining of wisdom and deliverance. 

In the causal nexus the third item is consciousness, from 
which name and form arise. " If consciousness, Ananda, 
did not enter into the womb, would name and form arise 
in the womb ? ” “ No, sir.” “ And if consciousness, 

Ananda, after it has entered into the womb were again to 
leave its place, would name and form be born into this 
life ? ” “ No, sir.” " And if consciousness, Ananda, were 

again lost to the boy or to the girl while they were yet 
small, would name and form attain growth, increase and 



414 INDIAN PHILOSOPHY 

progress ? ” “ No, sir.” 1 At death, while the other ele- 

ments, body, feelings, perceptions vanish, vijnana or 
consciousness persists, as the connecting link between the 
old and the new. Only when we attain nirvana or deliver- 
ance does it completely disappear. It is the element of 
consciousness which becomes the germ of the new being 
when the old being dies. This germ seeks in the womb 
the material stuff from which a new state of being is formed. 
If consciousness does not find the necessary material 
structure, it cannot develop. “ If, Ananda, consciousness 
were not to find name and material form as its resting-place, 
would then birth, old age and death, the origin and develop- 
ment of sorrow, reveal themselves in succession ? ” “ No, 

sir, they would not.” 1 

The world of objects stands opposed to the conscious 
subject. If there is no subject, there is no object. As we 
have seen, the activity of the six senses depends on the 
world which arises from the impressions produced when the 
senses come into touch with objects. The rise of impres- 
sions constitutes birth, their cessation, death. The two, 
consciousness and name and form, are inter-dependent. 
From them the six fields, eye, ear, nose, tongue, body and 
manas or mind, arise. Thence are developed the organs 
necessary for communication with the external world and 
the objects of the world, forms, sounds, colours, tastes, 
tangibility and thoughts. Thoughts are said to exist 
objectively confronting manas or mind, even as visible 
bodies exist before the eyes. Sometimes it is said that 
the eye is the product of seeing, the ear of hearing. 

From feeling arises tanha or thirst or longing, which leads 
us from birth to birth. It is the potent cause of life and 
suffering. We are because we thirst for being. We suffer 
because we thirst for pleasure : " Whomsoever thirst holds 
in subjection that thirst, that contemptible thing which 
pours its venom through the world, his suffering grows as 
the grass grows. Whosoever holds it in subjection . . . 
suffering falls off from him as the water drops from the lotus 
flowers.” 3 “As, if the root be uninjured, even as a hewn 

' Mahnnidana Sutta. ’ Mahapada.ua Sutta and Samyutta Nikaya, i. 

3 Dhammapada, v. 335, 



ETHICAL IDEALISM OF BUDDHISM 415 


tree grows up anew mightily, so, if the excitement of thirst 
be not wholly dead, suffering ever and anon breaks out 
again.” 1 Tanha or thirst in its threefold form is the cause 
of all suffering. 3 

From thirst comes clinging or upadana. The flame of 
thirst clings to the fuel of upadana. Wherever it may go 
the flame has the fuel clinging to it. Deliverance is the 
extinction of thirst, and bondage is clinging to things. 
Only by the cessation of clinging can the soul be delivered 
from sinful existence. 

From clinging to existence comes becoming or bhava, 
which Candrakirti interprets as the karma which brings about 
rebirth. 3 From becoming comes birth, from birth come old ago 
and death, pain and lamentation, sorrow, anxiety and despair. 

The whole scheme seems dogmatic. It aims at show- 
ing that vijnana, or consciousness of “ I,” does not reside 
in an eternal soul, but is a continuous phenomenon arising 
by way of cause and effect. It elaborates the answer con- 
tained in the second and third truths of the origin and 
the extinction of suffering. The vanity of all existence 
should be understood before the pain of existence can be 
abolished. The individuality to which we cling is only a 
form, an empty appearance occasioned by ignorance, the 
first and the root cause. The persistence of ignorance is 
indicated by the persistence of individuality. It is not a 
question of the individual manufacturing sorrow ; he is 
himself a form of sorrow. The sense of " I ” which gene- 
rates the illusion is itself an illusion. Individuality is the 
symptom as well as the disease. According to the Upani- 
sads the life history of the individual is continued so long 
as there Is ignorance in the understanding and leanness in 
the soul, In the Theologia Gennanica it is stated : “ Nothing 
burneth in hell but self-will,” and this self-will is avidya 
actualising itself. It is the cause as well as the product, the 
deceiver as well as the deceived. Ignorance and individuality 
are mutually dependent. Individuality means limitation, and 
limitation means ignorance. Ignorance can cease only with 
the cessation of the possibility of ignorance, namely, indi- 

* Dhammapada, v. 338. 1 See Malidvagga, 1 . 1. 2. 

I Punarbhavajanakam karma. Madliyamika Vjrtti. 



416 INDIAN PHILOSOPHY 

viduality. The whole world is a prey to ignorance, and so 
it suffers From the monarch to the mendicant, from 
the creeping thing of earth to the shining deva of heaven, 
everything suffers. “ There are five things which no 
samana and no Brahmana and no god, neither Mara, nor 
Brahma, nor any being in the universe can bring about : 
that what is subject to sickness should not be sick, that 
what is subject to death should not die, that what is sub- 
ject to decay should not decay, that what is liable to 
pass away should not pass away.” 1 Individuality born of 
avidya is the crux of all life, the original sin of all existence. 

The whole scheme rests on avidya, but we are not told 
how exactly this avidya arises. The beginning of the 
circuit is not apparent. We cannot find its cause. It 
seems to be a blind end or an incomprehensible reality 
which we must accept unthinkingly. To Buddha every- 
thing that lives, moves and displays individual existence 
does so through the power of avidya. Its presence is 
attested by the fact of existence. When we see a swinging 
pendulum we infer that it must have received a push. We 
infer avidya to be the antecedent condition of all existence. 
There is nothing prior to it, for the process of the world 
is beginningless. Buddha seems to assert the eternity of 
ignorance. In the chain of causation it is put first, for 
through it comes willing and through willing existence. 
When we ask what is it of which we are ignorant, early 
Buddhism says we are ignorant of the true nature of “ I ” 
and of the four noble truths. The cause of existence is a 
pre-existence like the present, where knowledge of the four 
sacred truths was not acquired. In the Upanisads the 
cause of all suffering is traced to the avidya, pertaining to 
the fundamental identity of the ego with the soul of the 
world, which leads to egoity. In both, egoity is the result 
of avidya, in both it is the non-possession of the saving 
knowledge that hides from us the truth. 

Buddha recognises that ignorance is nothing absolute. 
It comes into play that it may abolish itself. The meta- 
physical problem of the rise of ignorance seems to be evaded. 
We cannot account for it. We cannot say it is real, lor it 

* Angutir.ra Nikaya, ii. Oldeabcrg : Buddha, p. 217 



ETHICAL IDEALISM OF BUDDHISM 417 


can be sublated. Nor is it unreal, for in that case it could not 
produce anything. But Buddhism does not consider avidya 
to be a cause by courtesy. It is really the source of all 
existence. Perhaps the Upanisad theory is truer. The 
manifold world has the power of concealing reality at the 
same time that it manifests it. This power is the central 
force, the non-being, which pushes reality into outward 
manifestation. This explanation is not possible until we 
explicitly posit a central reality. So long as such a central 
being is not admitted, the nature of avidya and its origin 
will remain unsolved. But everything in Buddhism is 
favourable to the Upanisad hypothesis. Avidya is not 
absolutely useless. It provides room for the possibility of 
deliverance from itself. If nirvana is more than extinction, 
the truth more than a mere passing shadow, then indi- 
viduality is not absolute non-being, but a mixture of being 
and non-being, and avidya is not falsehood so much as lack 
of knowledge. When it is abolished truth remains. Later 
Buddhist writers like A£vagho§a speak of an abrupt 
upheaval of avidya out of the Tathata, the sudden rise of 
the individual will out of the universal. Vasubandhu 
explains the individuals as the imperfect reflections of the 
one universal mind. Avidya, then, is the £akti or the force of 
the absolute which brings about the procession of individual 
existences from out of the universal. It is the principle of 
negativity at the very heart of reality. Behind it our finite 
intellect cannot penetrate. Buddhistic metaphysics becomes 
satisfactory and intelligible only if it is completed by some 
form of absolute idealism. 


XIV 

Ethics 

Long to the watcher is the night 
To the weary wand’rer along the road. 

To him who will not see truth's light. 

Long is the torment of liis chain of births. 

So reads a Buddhist proverb . 1 Life on earth is a pil- 
grimage in a strange land w'hich the true knower is not 

1 Oldenberg: Ancient India, p. 94. 



418 INDIAN PHILOSOPHY 

anxious to prolong. Buddha points a way out of the 
inward contradiction characteristic of human life. Redemp- 
tion from suffering is the motive of Buddha’s teaching. 
To escape from the pervasive evil of existence is the goal 
of moral life. Salvation consists in the unmaking of our- 
selves. While nirvana is the highest goal, all forms of 
conduct which lead to it positively or bring about an undoing 
of rebirth are good, and their opposites bad. The ordinary 
standards of mundane values require modification. 

The ethics of Buddhism is based on its psychology . 1 
All sound philosophy and true ethics require correct psycho- 
logical analysis. The psychology of Buddhism is elaborated 
in the interests of ethics. The Buddhist discipline, the 
culture of the will, etc., require some theory of the way in 
which sensations are produced and attention developed. 
Buddhism analyses the moral personality of man and finds 
the principle of moral causation operating in its growth. 
Even the repudiation of the Atman theory has an ethical 
motive. Will, according to Buddhism, is man’s distinctive 
endowment by virtue of which he is an ethical being. The 
doctrine of karma or moral causation exhibits all existence 
as born of desire. With Kant, Buddha would say that the 
only thing in the world which possesses an absolute value 
is the good will, the will freely determined by the moral 
law. All human beings are capable of willing the good 
as good. Individuality ceases when, with the wearying 
of the will, action ceases. Action ceases when delight of 
the senses in objects ceases. This delight ceases by the 
recognition of the transiency of life. We must try to break 
up the composite self so as to prevent fresh formations. 
Escape from the chain of rebirth into the bliss of life 
eternal is the ideal of Buddhism, as of many other Indian 
and non-Indian systems. The Orphic Brotherhood yearned 
to be delivered from the grievous wheel of re-incarnations, 
and Plato believed in a beatific condition where we can 
eternally contemplate the archetypes of truth, goodness and 
beauty. 

1 Martincan was wrong when he said that “ psychological ethics are 
altogether peculiar to Christendom." ( Types oj Lthical Theotv, vol. i., 
p. 14.) 



ETHICAL IDEALISM OF BUDDHISM 419 

Karma is an act both intellectual and' volitional. It is 
doubly qualified, being a mental intention issuing in an 
effect. Psychologically every act has three sides : (i) the 
volitional preparation, (2) the act itself, and (3) what is 
called the “ back ” of the act, the feeling of regret or 
remorse which follows the act. The first is the intention 
or the resolve. Though it is not the act itself, it is not 
meaningless. Again, every choice and every act possesses a 
real worth and value, transient in time but permanent in 
character. Some acts have their retribution immediately, 
some after a time, perhaps in the next existence. Acts are 
distinguished into two kinds : (1) those which are pure, 

free from asravas, and (2) those which are impure or tainted 
by them. The pure ones, free from passion, desire and 
ignorance, do not entail any retribution, do not lead to 
but destroy fresh individual existence. They prepare the 
way for nirvana. Meditation on the four noble truths by 
which one tries to enter the paths of arhatship is a pure 
act, above good or evil consequences. All other acts are 
impure from this standpoint, and among the impure ones 
which have as their general feature accompaniment by 
some reward or retribution in this life or later, a distinc- 
tion is made into good and bad acts. Different standards 
are adopted. Good acts are those which lead to the con- 
quest of passions, desires, and illusions of the ego. Bad 
acts are those which lead to unpleasant retributions. Again, 
good acts are those done with the motive of happiness in 
the world hereafter (lokottara), bad acts are those done 
with the idea of gaining happiness here below. The former 
destroy desire and lead to a cancelling of the rewards of 
other acts. Their eventual fruit seems to be nirvana or 
deliverance. Again, good acts are those which aim at the 
welfare of others, bad acts those which aim at self- 
advantage. These different criteria agree with one another. 
The acts which lead to a conquest of passion or a really 
good life hereafter are those which aim at the world wel- 
fare. They possess the three features of absence of lust 
(alobha), absence of hatred (advesa), and absence of delu- 
sion (amoha). The bad acts which aim at self-interest 
and happiness on earth and lead to the bondage of birth 

14 * 


VOL. I 



420 


INDIAN PHILOSOPHY 


are born of a false vision (mithyadrsti), lust and hatred. 1 
Moral evil is due to ignorance or mistaking the value and 
nature of things. 

The system enunciated by Buddha is free from the 
extremes of self-indulgence and self-mortification. Buddha 
found after six years of ascetic life that the true way “ can- 
not be attained by one who has lost his strength.” “ There 
are two extremes which he who has gone forth ought not to 
follow — habitual devotion, on the one hand, to the passions, 
to the pleasure of sensual things ; and habitual devotion, 
on the other hand, to self-mortification, which is painful, 
ignoble, unprofitable. There is a middle path discovered 
by the Tathagata— a path which opens the eyes and 
bestows understanding, which leads to peace, to insight to 
the higher wisdom, to nirvana Verily it is the Aryan 
eightfold path. That is to say : right beliefs, right aspira- 
tions, right speech, right conduct, right mode of livelihood, 
right effort, right mindedness and right rapture.” 2 This 
eightfold path represents the morality of Buddhism. 

Right belief has the first place. What we do reflects 
what we think. Wrong acts issue from wrong beliefs. 
Mostly we do not realise that the elements of self will go 
dowm to dust in death and so cling to individuality. To 
remove wrong views, right knowledge is necessary. In 
Buddhist psychology will and intelligence go together. 

Right aspiration is a product of right vision. “ It is the 
longing for renunciation ; the hope to live in love with all ; 
the aspiration of true humanity.” 3 Giving up the idea of 
separateness, the aspirant works for the whole. The resolve 
must be a real one, according to the Mahayana, making the 
aspirant say : “ I must bear the burden of all creatures.” 4 
Aspirations must be turned to activities. They must 
find expression in right speech, right action, and right living. 
“ To abstain from falsehood, to abstain from back-biting, 
to abstain from harsh language, and to abstain from frivo- 
lous talk is called right spu ch.” 

Right action is unselfish action. Buddha does not 

■ See W.B.T., pp. 216-18. 

* First sermon on setting in motion the Wheel of the Law 

1 S atavibhano.i. 4 Vajradvaja Snt*a. 



ETHICAL IDEALISM OF BUDDHISM 421 


believe in ceremonialism, prayer and ritual, spell and sacri- 
fice. “ Better homage to a man grounded in the dharma 
than to Agni for a hundred years.” When once a Brahmin 
put it to him that bathing in the Bahuka river washes 
a sinner of his sin, Buddha retorted : “ The Bahuka, the 
Adhika cannot purify the fool of his sin, bathe he himself 
ever so often. ... No river can cleanse the doer of evil, 
the man of malice, the perpetrator of crime. To the pure 
it is ever the holy month of Phaggu. To the pure it is 
always a perpetual fast. To the man of good deeds it is 
a vow everlasting. Have thy bath here, even here, O 
Brahmin, be kind to all beings. If thou speakest not 
false, if thou killest not life, if thou takest not what is 
given thee, secure in self-denial — what wouldst thou gain 
by going to Gaya ? Any water is Gaya to thee.” 1 “ Not 
superstitious rites,” says A£oka, “ but kindness to servants 
and underlings, respect to those deserving of respect, self- 
control coupled with kindness in dealing with living 
creatures, these and virtuous deeds of like nature are verily 
the rites that are everywhere to be performed.” “ Pious 
regulations are of small account, whereas meditation is 
excellent.” 2 3 Buddha did not declare open war against the 
ceremonialism of the times, but tried to infuse moral signifi- 
cance into its forms and thus undermine it. “ Anger, 
drunkenness, deception, envy, these constitute uncleanli- 
ness ; not the eating of flesh.” 3 Again, “ neither absti- 
nence, nor going naked, nor shaving the head, nor a rough 
garment, neither offerings to priests, nor sacrifices to the 
gods will cleanse a man who is not free from delusions.” 
Buddha was against the worship of the ugly and the repul- 
sive embodied in certain morbid types of asceticism. His 
sweet reasonableness comes in his condemnation of unnatural 
forms of asceticism. 

Buddhism insists on purity of motive and humility in 
life. Of the paremitas, or perfections which help us to 
attain nirvana, rila has an important place. The dis- 


1 Laksimnarsu, Essence of Buddhism, p. 230. 

1 ASoka Pillar Edict, vii. 

3 Cf. " It is not that which entereth into a man that dcfileth him, but 
that which cometh out.” 



422 INDIAN PHILOSOPHY 

tinction between £ila, or morality, and dana, or charity, is 
one between passive and active virtue, nivrtti and pravrtti. 
Sila is the observance of rules like that of non-violence, 
dana implies active self-sacrifice and helping those in need 
of help. It is living for the good and benefit of all beings. 
The ideal disposition of charity is brought out in the story 
of Yuan Chwang, who, when he was about to be sacrificed 
for the goddess Durga by pirates, thought : “ Let me return 
and be born here below that I may instruct and convert 
these men, and cause them to practise themselves in doing 
good and giving up their evil deeds, and thus by diffusing 
far and wide the benefits of the dharma to give rest to all 
the world." 

Right action leads to right living, free from lying and 
deceit, fraud and chicanery. Thus far the stress has been 
on conduct, but inner purification is also attended to. 
The aim of all endeavour is to remove the causes of sorrow. 
Subjective purification is needed for it. The last three of 
right effort, right thought and right tranquillity refer to it. 

Right effort consists in practising control of passions so 
as to prevent the rise of bad qualities. An inhibition of 
the bad and a reinforcement of the good by mental avoid- 
ance and concentration is what this means. If we want 
to expel an undesirable idea which haunts our mind, Buddha 
recommends the following five methods : (i) Attend to 

some good idea. (2) Face the danger of the consequences 
of letting the bad idea develop into action. (3) Turn 
attention away from the bad idea. (4) Analyse its antece- 
dents and so nullify the consequent impulse. (5) Coerce 
the mind with the aid of bodily tension. By a£ubhabhavana, 
or reflection on the evil, we acquire a disgust for all that 
is corrupt. " Reverend Sir, have you seen a woman pass 
this way ? ” and the elder said, “ I cannot say whether it 
is a woman or a man that passed this way. This I know 
that a set of bones is travelling on this road.” 1 Without 

* M. Poussin describes the force of true insight as distinct from intellectual 
knowledge in these words : " Whosoever understands the truth of suffering, 
under its fourfold aspect, will acknowledge the falsehood of vulgar notions, 
and will see pleasure and existence as transitory and painful, but he will 
not destroy his innate desire of pleasure, his thirst after existence. What 
is to be gained is a profound and efficacious feeling of the miseries of life, 



ETHICAL IDEALISM OF BUDDHISM 423 

right effort there can be no enlightenment. Through it 
alone can we destroy anger, envy, pride and attachment to 
objects. 

Right effort cannot be isolated from right thinking. 
To avoid mental unsteadiness, the mind that plays and 
roves 1 is to be controlled. Emotions are to Buddhism as 
to stoicism, “ failures, disturbances of moral health, and if 
indulged become chronic diseases of the soul.” They 
destroy all healthy endeavour. Even spiritual pride 
endangers moral progress. “ Whosoever is pure and knows 
that he is pure and finds pleasure in knowing that he is 
pure becomes impure and dies with an impure thought. 
Whosoever is impure and knows that he is impure and 
makes effort to become pure dies of a pure thought.” 
“ On the mind depends dharma, on the practice of dharma 
depends enlightenment.” 2 

While the five skandhas are said to constitute an 
exhaustive account of the nature of the human being, so 
long as he is looked upon as a unit of the empirical world, 
we get a slight modification of this view when we turn to 
the Buddhist emphasis on intuitive knowledge, called 
prajna. The theory of knowledge based on the skandhas 
is sensationalism. The concept of prajna compels a change 
in it. Prajna stands for the highest activity of the human 
mind, and has supreme value from the religious point of 
view. Attempts are no doubt made in the Pali canon and 
Visuddhimagga to bring prajna under one of the skandhas. 
In the Sutta pitaka it is allied to vijnana. In the Abhidharma 
it is brought under the samskaras. The Kathavatthu refers 
to and refutes a heretical view which would class one form 
of prajna, divyacaksu, or the heavenly eye, under the 
rupaskandha. In Buddhaghosa’s day sariijna, vijnana 
and prajna represented simple and complex modes of 
human insight. It is the most reasonable interpretation. 

of the impurity of the bodv, of universal nothingness, to such a degree that 
the ascetic should see a woman as she really is, as a skeleton furnished with 
nerves and flesh, as an illusion made up of carnal desire. Mind will thus 
be freed from love, hatred and from every passion.” { Transactions of the 
Third International Congress of Religions, vol. ii., p. 41.) 

1 Tatratatrabhinandinl. 

* Cittadhlno dharmo dharmadhlno bodhib. 



424 INDIAN PHILOSOPHY 

The skandhas represent the empirical point of view and 
lay stress on the knowledge the individual has when he 
regards himself as a separate entity. When the individual 
nature is transformed into unity with the whole, prajna 
displaces the empirical knowledge. The unregenerate culti- 
vate vijnana, while the regenerate develop prajna. There is 
a steady growth from sense-cognition to true insight. The 
two are not independent, but the latter is an expansion of 
the earlier. Prajna terminates in bodhi or enlightenment. 

Mental culture is not so much a suppression of the 
senses as a cultivation of them to see the truth. In the 
Indriyabhavana Sutta Buddha asks a pupil of Parasarya 
how his master teaches the culture of sense. The answer 
is given that the senses are trained to the extent when 
they fail to fulfil their functions. The eye sees no object 
and the ear hears no sound. Buddha rejoins that this 
would mean that the blind and the deaf have their senses 
best cultivated. A true sense-culture means a training of 
the senses so as to discriminate all forms of sense-con- 
sciousness and estimate their real worth. Spiritual insight 
is an expansion and development of intellectual vijnana 
and sense-perception. Buddha seems to admit the reality 
of an absolute which we intuit in the state of prajna. 
“ Serene, pure, radiant lookest thou, Sariputta, whence 
comest thou ? ” “I have been alone, Ananda, in rapture 
of thought . . . till I rose above perception of the world 
without into an infinite sphere of cognition, and this again 
melted into nothing. . . . Insight came, and I discerned 
with the celestial vision the way of the world, the tendencies 
of men, and their coming to be, past, present and yet to 
come. And all this arose in me and passed without one 
thought of ego-making or of mine-making.” On this 
insight into a transcendent reality only a philosophy like 
that of the Upanisads can be built. Buddha shrank from 
it, for systematic philosophy had to wait for a later day. 
He gives us only a series of standpoints and shrewd 
psychological observations. 

While the previous stage refers to prajna or insight, we 
have next dhyana, or meditation, with its result of tran- 
quillity or samadhi. Dhyana is highest contemplation, and 



ETHICAL IDEALISM OF BUDDHISM 425 


takes the place of prayer in Buddhism. This aspect of 
early Buddhism is developed in the Hinayana school. 
Dhyana has four stages: the first, of gladness and joy 
arising from a life of solitude accompanied by insight, reflec- 
tion, contemplation and inquiry, and freed from all sensu- 
ality ; the second, of elation, and internal calm and a deep 
peace of mind, without any conscious reflection ; the third, 
of the total absence of all passions and prejudices, where 
atmamoha, or lust of self, is completely stilled ; and the 
fourth, of self-possession and complete tranquillity, without 
care and joy, for all that gives joy or care is put aside . 1 
Dhyana is the steady endeavour to bring the mind into 
harmony with all that is. It is a deliberate effort to 
eliminate egotism and be lost in the truth. A part of the 
daily life of the members of the Buddhist sangha consists 
in the practice of contemplations. The modes of training 
the heart and the mind are borrowed from the prevailing 
beliefs. We are asked to cherish the moods of loving-kind- 
ness (maitrl), compassion (karuna), cheerfulness (mudita), 
and impartiality (upeksa). These are the four sublime 
moods or Brahma viharas. They are the systematic 
attempts to make the sentiments of love, sympathy, etc., 
extend over ever-widening groups till the whole world of 
humanity, nay, of sentient beir.gs is included. The forty 
subjects of meditation and the four ecstatic moods tend to 
diminish passion and lead us from the dominion of the 
senses. A life of meditation of the highest restores us to 
the real truth. We cannot help asking what is the object 
on which dhyana or spiritual contemplation is to be 
exercised. 

There is no reference to grace in Buddhism. It is only 
a question of self-development. Man can develop by 

' Childers states the idea thus : " The priest concentrates his mind 

upon a single thought. Gradually his soul becomes filled with a super- 
natural ecstasy and serenity, while his mind still reasons upon and investigates 
the Subject chosen for contemplation ; this is the first jhana. Still fixing 
his thought upon the same subject, be then frees his mind from reasoning 
and investigation, while ecstasy and serenity remain, and this is the second 
jh.lna. Next, bis thoughts still fixed as before, he divests himself of ecstasy 
and attains the third jhana, which is a state of tranquil serenity. Lastly 
he passes to the fourth jhana, in which the mind, exalt'd and purifed, i- 
indifferent to all emotions alike of pleasure and of pain.” i,Ot:!hnary. p \ r ) 



426 INDIAN PHILOSOPHY 

effort and training a strength and a virtue that can render 
him independent of all things. None can prevail against 
him if he conquers himself. “ Not even a god can change 
into defeat the victory of a man who has vanquished him- 
self.” 1 Because Buddha demands love of humanity and 
discipline of mind independent of a religious sanction, there 
are people who exclaim that Gautama Buddha was the 
positivist August Comte born 2,000 years too soon ! 

Both the Buddhist dhyana and the yoga doctrine emphasise 
the physical and hygienic conditions necessary for mental 
training. Control of the body is a preparation for enlighten- 
ment. Tapas is replaced by psychological exercises leading 
to spiritual insight. Exercises of spiritual abstraction 
whereby the individual withdraws his powers from the 
external world and realises the stillness of the ego are 
common to all yogic theories. In the four states of dhyana 
we have a progressive and methodical abstraction from the 
plurality of the phenomenal world. Dhyana is not a 
desultory reverie, but a set exercise to heighten the powers 
of mind by closing the avenues of sense. M. Poussin 
says : “ The mind once concentrated and strengthened by 
exercise with the clay disk, or any other exercise of the 
same kind, is successively to abandon its contents and its 
categories. The ecstatic starts from a state of contempla- 
tion, coupled with reasoning and reflection ; he abandons 
desire, sin, distractions, discursiveness, joy, hedonic feeling ; 
he goes beyond any notion of matter, of contact, of differ- 
ence ; through meditation on void space, knowledge with- 
out object, contemplation of nothingness, he passes into the 
stage where there is neither consciousness nor unconscious- 
ness, and finally he realises the actual disappearance of 
feeling and notion. It is a lull in the psychological life 
which coincides with perfect hypnosis.” 2 We cannot say 
with any definiteness or certainty whether greater freedom 
of mind and clarity of imagination can be obtained by a 
shutting out of sense impressions or a hypnotic exhaustion 
of the outer senses. Modern science in tliis department is 
still in its infancy. Buddhism along with the rest of 
Indian thought believed it to be so, and the belief persists 
1 Oharamapada, 105. 1 The Way to Nirvaya, p. 164. 



ETHICAL IDEALISM OF BUDDHISM 427 


even to-day. It is generally accepted in India that when 
mental states are checked and sense impressions suspended, 
the empirical self is reduced to the lowest point and the 
universal self shines forth. The ideals of yogic practice 
are different in different metaphysical systems. In the 
Upanisads it is union with or realisation of Brahman. 
In Patanjali’s Yoga it is insight into truth. In Buddhism 
it is attainment of the Bodhisattva condition or realisa- 
tion of the emptiness of the world. 

Buddha did not consider every trance to be necessarily 
good. It must aim at the right end, namely, the eradica- 
tion of desire. Buddha realised that there were those 
who took to yogic exercises to acquire supernatural powers. 
Buddha refined the practice by telling them that even such 
powers could be acquired only through the practice of 
righteousness and wisdom . 1 Buddha forbade his disciples 
to work miracles for display. Acquisition of supernatural 
powers does not confer any spiritual advantage. The 
yogic beliefs of Buddhism are to be seen clearly in the 
Lamaism of Tibet. 

The eightfold path is sometimes divided into four stages, 
where each is marked by the breaking of the fetters, which 
are ten in number, which bind man to earth. The first 
of these fetters is the delusion of a personal self (satkaya- 
drsti), the mother of all egoism. The realisation that 
there is no permanent self, that what is, is only an aggre- 
gation of skandhas, may tempt us into the path of self- 
indulgence and scepticism. This has to be guarded against. 
The second obstacle is called scepticism (vieikitsa). It is 
a cloak for idleness or vice. We must also give up the 
belief in the efficacy of the purificatory rites and cere- 
monies. Rituals do not help us to free ourselves from 
lust, hatred and ignorance. He who is released from the 
delusion of the ego, from doubt of Buddha and his doctrines, 
and from belief in ceremonial rites, is said to have entered 
the first stage in the noble path. He is called the Srota- 
panna, or he who has got into the stream. About this state 
Dhammapada says : “ Better than sovereignty over the 

earth, better than going to heaven, better than lordship 

■ See Althankheya Sutta, S.B.E., vol. xi. 



428 INDIAN PHILOSOPHY 

over all worlds, is the reward of the first step in holiness.” 1 * 
The two next obstacles to be overcome are sensuality 
(kama) and malevolence (pratiglia). When these are con- 
quered he attains the second stage of the noble path. He 
is Sakrdagamin, or he who will once be re-born in the 
world of men. The deficiencies are minimised though not 
abolished. Those w r ho have reduced the cardinal errors of 
lust, resentment and glamour return to the world once 
before they attain final release. When these two impedi- 
ments are completely destroyed he becomes Anagamin. 
Though he is not free from all error, there is no more 
chance of falling backward. The impediments yet to be 
overcome are craving (raga) for material and immaterial 
pleasures in this world or another, pride (mana), self- 
righteousness (auddhatya), and ignorance of the true 
nature of things. When these fetters are burst he reaches 
the goal, becomes an arhat 3 (literally worthy), and attains 
the blessedness of nirvana. The causes of his suffering 
are exhausted and the impurities are washed aw'ay. He is 
no more subject to rebirth. The arhat condition is a 
state of blissful sanctification. Nirvana is the goal of 
Buddhism, and arhatship terminates in it. ) Upadhi£esa- 
nirvana is the arhatvaphala, or the fruition of sanctification. 
The arhat is still a man. It is when he dies that he ceases 
to exist. Then is the oil in the lamp of life spilt and the seed 
of existence withered. He vanishes from creation and attains 
Parinirvana, or the annihilation of the elements of being.3 

The Buddhist morality is more individual than social. 
In our lives we have to imitate the example of Buddha. 
Stress is not laid on convention and authority. When 
Buddha was asked by Ananda about instructions touching 
the order, he answered : " Be ye lamps unto yourselves ; 
be ye a refuge to yourselves ; betake yourselves to no 
external refuge ; hold fast to the truth as a lamp ; hold 
fast as a refuge to the truth ; look not for refuge to any- 
one besides yourselves.” 

1 Phamnrp.'.da 178. 

1 Arhat is a common woui used in pro -TJurldhistir times for anyone 
who attains the ideal of Ins r 1 . 

3 See 'Ike Religious Systems 0/ the Wei Id, pp. 148, 149. 



ETHICAL IDEALISM OF BUDDHISM 429 

Conduct is broadly distinguished into well-being and 
ill-being. The former springs out of unselfishness and 
results in acts of love and compassion, the latter is rooted 
in egoism and results in acts of malice, etc. Actions become 
good by the avoidance of the ten transgressions ; the three 
bodily sins, of murder, theft and adultery ; the four sins 
of speech, lying, slander, abuse, and idle talk ; and the three 
sins of mind, covetousness, hatred and error. We have 
also other classifications of sinful conduct. Sensuality, 
desire for rebirth, ignorance, metaphysical speculation, are 
four kinds of sinful conduct. Sometimes the whole is 
summed up in simple formulas, apparently negative, but 
really positive, which say, kill no living thing, do not steal, 
do not commit adultery, do not speak untruths, do not 
drink intoxicating liquors. These rules emphasise the 
need for self-control in five different directions. Positively 
they mean control anger, the desire for material posses- 
sions, the lusts of the flesh, cowardice and malevolence 
(the chief cause of untruthful ness), and the craving for 
unwholesome excitement. The result of this self-control 
will be to bring happiness to himself and others and develop 
positive virtue. Control of anger leads to growth of gentle- 
ness, control of covetousness leads to the spread of charity, 
control of lust to purity in love. Sometimes the ideal 
virtues are stated to be ten in number. Charity, purity of 
conduct, patience, strenuousness, meditation, intelligence, 
employment of right means, resoluteness, strength and 
knowledge. Sometimes the ethical discipline of siksa is 
put down in the three rules of morality, culture and insight. 
In Milinda we find that good conduct, perseverance, mind- 
fulness, meditation and wisdom constitute the virtuous 
life. 1 The codes of duties of the Upanisads and early 
Buddhism are not different in essentials. - 

We may turn to the motive or inspiration of moral life. 
Avoidance of pain and quest of pleasure are the springs of 
all conduct. Nirvana is the highest sukha or bliss. Modern 
hedonists contend that happiness is found in the increase 

■ ii. i. 7-15. 

» Suicide is wrong, for putting an end to life is no cure for the illusion 
of the ego. 



430 INDIAN PHILOSOPHY 

of life in its length and breadth. The Buddhists claim 
that it lies in the dissolution of the conditions of selfishness 
and ignorance which lead to renewed existence. Eternal 
salvation is what Buddha sets before man at the end of 
the narrow path of knowledge, virtue and austerity, and 
not any small end of wealth, conquest or power. It is 
confusion of mind which leads the self to identity itself 
with small interests. This confusion is common in the 
world. “ I do not see any living being in the three worlds 
who does not prefer his own self to anything.” 1 Selfish- 
ness is caused by imperfect understanding and consequent 
confusion of the bounds of individuality. Unselfishness is 
the result of the right perception of the truth. The true 
good is attainable only by a suppression of the subjectivity 
of self and the development of the universal consciousness. 
It is a sublimated selfishness that tells us that we should 
give up our selfish craving. Compassion for the suffering 
of others is the impelling motive of altruism. We are all 
comrades in suffering, subject to a common doom. All 
creatures in heaven and earth, even those lower than our- 
selves in the scale of being, are subject to the law of moral 
perfection. The whole existence, divine, human and animal, 
in all its spheres is linked together by the chain of moral 
causation. It is this community of nature which underlies 
the system of Buddha, though it is not explicitly recognised 
anywhere. The raw material of human nature is not 
completely egoistic. Unselfish conduct is not unnatural. 
We need not think that egoistic action is the only intelli- 
gible action. To say that each individual is outside of the 
other is a half truth. There is also a vital and organic 
union of all beings. The development of this uniting con- 
sciousness or the attainment of fullness of knowledge, peace 
and joy is nirvana. Freedom is the expansion into the 
universal consciousness, the widening out of our feeling 
and sympathy for all that is. “ The disciple lets his mind 
pervade one quarter of the world with thoughts of love, 
and so the second . . . and thus the whole wide 
world. ...” 1 While, strictly speaking, Buddhist morality 
has no supernatural sanction, still for the ordinary man 

1 Sariiyutta, i. 3 Mahasudassana Suttanta. 



ETHICAL IDEALISM OF BUDDHISM 43] 

the hope of heaven to be reached after death is kept quite 
intact. 

The conditions of virtue aie independent of outer things. 
It makes little difference what you are, prince or peasant, 
for all are imperfect. A true and honest life alone counts. 
Buddhism insists not so much on the performance of duty 
as on the transformation of the whole being. Those arrayed 
like Solomon in all his glory, magnificent in physique and 
proud in intellect, are not the really great. Without 
humility, charity and love, life is death at the core. 

The charge of intellectualism is repeated against the 
ethics of Buddhism. Knowledge is no doubt emphasised, 
for ignorance is said to be the root cause of sorrow and 
suffering. It is the possession of truth that brings about 
a reform in mind. Selfish desire cannot arise in a mind 
enlightened by true wisdom. So the liberated soul is called 
Buddha, the knower. 1 Virtue is knowledge of the good. 
Yet Buddha recognises that this knowledge cannot dissolve 
the body built of karma, though it prevents the building 
of fresh karma. We have also to realise that by know- 
ledge Buddha did not mean mere intellectual learning. It 
is not acquaintance with theological dogmas or esoteric 
mysteries, but knowledge of which morality is the necessary 
condition. It is a life of truth which we can acquire only 
by clearing the soul of the darkening influence of passion 
and impulse. Knowledge is not something to be packed 
away in some corner of our brain, but what enters into 
our being, colours our emotion, haunts our soul, and is as 
close to us as life itself. It is the over-mastering power 
which through the intellect moulds the whole personality, 
trains the emotions and disciplines the will. That doctrinal 
belief is not what is meant by knowledge is brought out 

1 *' Here Brahmanical speculation anticipates Buddhism in diction as 
well as in thought . . . when he who has come to know the Atman is men- 
tioned in the ^atapathabrahmana as ‘ delivered,’ the word then used for 
knowing is that word (pratibiuldha) , which also signifies awaking, the word 
which the Buddhists are accustomed to use when they describe how Buddha 
has in a solemn hour under the asvattha tree gained the knowledge of the 
delivering truth or is awake to the delivering truth ; the same word from 
which also the name ‘Buddha,’ that is, the ‘knowing/ the * awake/ 13 
derived.” (Oldenberg : Buddha, p. 52.) 



432 


INDIAN PHILOSOPHY 


in Tevijja Sutta. 1 To the question, What shall I do to 
be saved ? Buddha gives the answer in the spirit of the 
Upanisads. Salvation consists in the overcoming of selfish- 
ness, theoretically the illusion of the ego, and practically the 
craving of self. The acquisition of truth, Buddha again and 
again repeats, depends on these conditions : (i) Sraddha, 

or faith ; 2 (2) Darsana, or sight. Mere faith will not 
do. Truths acquired at second-hand on the authority of 
other people remain external to our minds, and do not 
become part of our lives. “ Now, 0 monks, are you going 
to say we respect the master and, out of respect for him, 
we believe this and that ? You must not say so. Is not 
what you will say to be true, that exactly which you have 
by yourselves seen, known and apprehended ? ” 3 (3) Bha- 

vana, or cultivation. It is meditation or pondering over 
truth unceasingly till we practically become one with it 
and live it. The higher life cannot be entered upon by 
the undisciplined, and yet the crown of human life is the 
direct perception of the truth which makes all false notions 
impossible. Aristotle closes his ethics with contemplation 
as the ultimate good, after giving us a long survey of rela- 
tive goods. Buddha looks upon prajna as the highest 
possession, but takes care to add that prajna without love 
and benevolence is impossible, and even if possible, quite 
barren. Mystic contemplation without practical goodness 
is not perfection. 

Another complaint made against Buddhist ethics is 
that it is ascetic. If asceticism means suppression of 
desire, then Buddhist ethics is ascetic. Desire builds the 
house of existence. It is its nature to flee endlessly and 
restlessly from all that it has. It knows no peace. In a 
lower form it is unregenerate impulse, craving, or tanha, 
while the rationalised tanha is desire. The extinction of 
tanha is possible only by the extirpation of desire. This 
can be achieved by strenuous volition, or chanda. Buddha 
does not advocate mere passivity. For the wrong desires 
cannot be suppressed by quiescence, but only by a strong 
will and purpose. 

1 iii. 1. 2. 

1 Majjhima, i. 


* Majjhima, i. 7 r. 

< Dliamniapada, 183. 



ETHICAL IDEALISM OF BUDDHISM 438 

Buddha insists not on an abolition of will or a turning 
away from the world, but on a hot contest with desire, an 
active wrestling with evil. “ If the critic would dwell 
more on the positive tendencies in Buddhist ethics, he 
might discern under the outward calm of mien of the 
Buddhist sage, in literature and art, a passion of emotion 
and will not paralysed or expurgated, but rendered subser- 
vient to and diffused around deep faith and high hope. 
For there is no doctrine, not even excepting Platonism, that 
sees in life, in the life that now is, greater possibilities of 
perfection. Nor is there any system, not excepting that of 
the Christian, which sees in the evolution of human love a 
more exalted transcendence of the lower forms of that 
emotion.” 1 Buddha does not want a suppression of emo- 
tion and desire, but asks for the cultivation of true love 
for all creation. This glowing emotion must fill the whole 
universe and result in an outflow of abounding goodwill. 
“ Our mind shall not waver, no vile speech will we utter ; 
we will abide tender and compassionate, loving in heart, 
void of secret malice ; and we will be ever suffusing such a 
one with the rays of our loving thought, and from him 
forthgoing we will be ever suffusing the whole world with 
thought of love far-reaching, grown great and beyond 
measure, void of ill-will and bitterness.’” The legendary 
stories contained in the Jatakas illustrate the deep love 
and curnpa.-sion exhibited by Buddha in his previous 
lives. 3 Buddha’s doctrine is the middle way between 
luxury and asceticism, and so he shrank from all excess 
and avoided extremes. He does not ask us to suppress 
desire but only divert it. The same conclusion may be 
reinforced by the Buddhist analysis of feeling. A state of 
consciousness is never good in itself, but good or bad by 

1 Mrs. Rhys Daeids: j.R.A.S., iSgS, p. 55. 

" Majjhiina Xik.lyu, 21. 

3 In Tumnatha’s History 0 / Indian Buddhism we have the story of the 
monk Aryasangha, who saw a certain dog snapping and barking at people, 
with the lower part of its body eaten and gnawed by v.ornis. Moved by 
compassion, Aryasamgha thought within himself, If I do not rid this dog 
of these worms, the poor creature will die ; if, however, I take the worms 
from off her and throw them away, the worms will die." Wherefore he 
resolved to cut some iicsff lioin his own body upon which to put the worms, 
and did 50 ’ 



434 INDIAN PHILOSOPHY 

its effects. If the effect is well-being, we have sukha 
(pleasure) ; if ill-being, we have duhkha (pain) ; if neither, 
we have a neutrally toned feeling. All creatures aim at well- 
being ; only they are mostly satisfied with relative 
well-being. A few there are w r ho aspire after absolute 
well-being or happiness. Buddha asks us to suppress the 
will to live on the low'er plane and cultivate the will to live 
well and gain the ultimate peace. If quietude and calm 
are admired, it is because they are aids to concentration. 
Will is to be controlled and not repressed. Without a 
disciplined exercise of the will nothing great can be accom- 
plished. When a young prince asks him how long it would 
take to graduate in his doctrine, Buddha points out that, 
as in the art of riding, even there everything depends on 
whether the pupil brings the five conditions of confidence, 
health, merit, energy and intelligence. 1 

We are asked to put down not all desires, but only the 
wrong desires by a strenuous effort of will.* “ I preach 
asceticism in as much as I preach the burning away of all 
conditions of the heart that are evil. One who so does is 
the true ascetic.” Besides, the ascetic discipline of Buddha 
has in view the mind’s inward landscape, and not the body’s 
outer fortunes. As a matter of fact, Buddha allows the 
care of the body, though not attachment to it. “ Have 
you ever at any time been hit in battle by an arrow ? ” 
“ Yes, I have.” “ And was the wound anointed with 
ointment, smeared with oil and bandaged w r ith a strip of 
fine cloth ? ” “ Yes, it was.” “ Did you love your wound ? ” 
“ No.” “ In exactly the same way the ascetics do not 
love their bodies ; but without being attached to them, they 
take their bodies in order to advance in the religious life.” 3 

Buddha allowed decent dress, regular food, shelter and 
medical treatment, even to the Bhiksus. He knew that 
bodily torture was injurious to strength of mind, so neces- 
sary for the understanding of philosophical truths. Buddha 
refined asceticism and discriminated between the true and 
the false. He condemned the morbid exaggerations of 
certain ugly types of asceticism. A knife if it be caught 

■ Majjhima, 65. • Mahlparinibbana Sutta, vii. 

1 Milinda, p. 73. 



ETHICAL IDEALISM OF BUDDHISM 435 


by the blade cuts the hand. False asceticism leads to the 
downward path. To him asceticism does not mean sever- 
ing the ties of life, but the rooting out of egoism. The 
ascetic is not he who punishes the body, but he who purifies 
the soul. Asceticism is only detachment from the things 
that distract our desires, “ the cares of the world and the 
deceitfulness of riches and the lusts of outer things.” In 
the Upanisads we find that Naciketas dismisses with 
supreme contempt the transient pleasures of the world in 
his eagerness to know the Brahman who lives beyond death, 
dwelling in the depths. Insistence on renunciation is 
necessary for all healthy life. When the nun Gautami 
asked Buddha to teach her the quintessence of the dharma, 
he said : "Of whatsoever teaching thou art sure that it 
leads to passion, and not to peace ; to pride, and not to 
humility ; to the desiring of much, and not the desiring 
of little ; to the love of society, and not to the love of 
solitude ; to idleness, and not to earnest striving ; to a 
mind hard to pacify, and not a mind easy to pacify — that, 
0 Gautami, that is not dharma.” 1 Meditation in solitude 
was advised as means for cultivating spiritual calm and 
detachment. 

It is not possible for Buddhism to discard its past. 
From the early Vedic times there had been in India ascetic 
tempers who had cut themselves adrift from the responsi- 
bilities of life and wandered free. We have seen in the 
Upanisads how, in their love for the supreme, some 
“ relinquish the desire for children, the struggle for wealth, 
the pursuit of worldly weal, and go forth as mendicants.” 
The Brahmanical codes recognised the right of these to 
sever themselves from the duties of life and the observance 
of rites. The ideal man of India before whom the prince 
and the peasant bow is the ascetic who walks about alms- 
bowl in hand, through streets and alleys, from house to 
house, without uttering a word or making a request. Of 
the mendicants, Jacobi says : " There can be no doubt 
from the laws laid down respecting them that they had a 
recognised position about the eighth century b.c.” The 
Buddhist Bhiksus are the mendicants living on alms, 

» Dahlke : Buddhist Essays, p. 215. 



436 INDIAN PHILOSOPHY 

taking the vow of poverty, and devoting themselves to the 
spreading of the gospel of Buddha. Of course, Buddha did 
not expect all men to become ascetics. He divides men 
into two classes, those who are still attached to the world 
and its life, upasakas, or laymen, and those who by self- 
mortification are delivered from it, £ramanas, or ascetics. 1 
Despite his great respect for worldly virtues, Buddha 
believed that the fulfilment of worldly duties is not directly 
helpful to salvation. " Full of hindrances is household life, 
a path defiled by passion ; free as the air is the life of him 
who has renounced all worldly things. How difficult is it 
for the man who dwells at home to live the higher life in 
all its fullness, in all its purity, in all its bright per- 
fection 1 Let me then cut off my hair and beard, let 
me clothe myself in the orange-coloured robes, and let me 
go forth from a household life into the homeless state.” 1 
There is no consistency, however, on this point, for accord- 
ing to Majjhima Nikaya a man may attain nirvana without 
being a monk. Though Buddha condemned morbid ascetic 
practices, it is a surprise to find that the discipline demanded 
of the Buddhist brethren is more severe in some points 
than any referred to in the Brahmanical texts. Though 
theoretically Buddha admits the possibility of gaining 
salvation without austere asceticism, still in practice it 
seems to be necessary for almost all according to him. 

Sangha is the Buddhistic brotherhood, which the dis- 
ciples join in order to realise the perfect life. It is a 
religious order to which members are admitted on the per- 
formance of certain vows and the profession of faith. It 
is open to all without exception. In the beginning Buddha 
took an unfavourable view of women. When Ananda 
asked him how a man should act in the presence of a 
woman, Buddha answered : " Avoid looking at her ... if it 
is necessary to look, do not speak to her ; if it be necessary 
to speak, then keep wide awake.” 3 When the widowed 
queen of Suddhodana decided to adopt the life of the 
hermitage and came to Buddha for conversion, accom- 
panied by the wives of 500 princes, Buddha refused three 

• Cf. the different orders of St. Francis. » Tevijja Sutta, i. 47. 

8 Mahlparimbbana Sutta, v. 23. 



ETHICAL IDEALISM OF BUDDHISM 437 


times, since their admission would perplex the minds of 
many who had entered the order. When again they came 
with bleeding feet and dusty dress, Ananda asked : “ Are 
Buddhas born into the world only for the benefit of men ? 
Assuredly it is for the benefit of women also.” Thereafter 
they were admitted. Since earthly suffering affected all, 
the way out of it must be open to all who choose to 
accept it. Only those afflicted with sickness and disease 
and confirmed criminals, also those whose admission would 
interfere with existing rights, such as soldiers, debtors and 
slaves, sons whose parents do not consent, and children 
were kept out. The Sangha is an organised brotherhood 
formed of monks and mendicants. The ascetics of the Brah- 
manical religion did not possess any such organised corpora- 
tion. The spirit of proselytism consciously attempted by 
the Buddhists is responsible for this organised action. The 
Buddhist monk has no power to save or condemn. He is 
not a worker of miracles or a mediator between God and 
man, but only a leader. The Sangha contains both lay 
members and monks. While the lay member assents to 
the doctrine, the monk is the missionary. The rules of 
the Buddhist Sangha were borrowed from the Brahmanical 
codes, though they were adapted to missionary pur- 
poses. The relation between Buddha and his disciple or 
between the monks and the followers is one of teacher and 
pupil. 

There is a good deal of misconception about Buddha’s 
attitude to caste. He does not oppose the institution, but 
adopts the Upanisad standpoint. The Brahmin or the 
leader of society is not so much a Brahmin by birth as by 
character In the time of Buddha the caste system was in a 
confused condition, where the distinctions were based on birth 
rather than on qualities. “ The Brahmin who has removed 
all sinfulness, who is free from haughtiness, from impurity, 
self-restrained, an accomplished master of knowledge, who 
has fulfilled the duties of holiness, such a Brahmin justly 
calls himself a Brahmin. He that gives way to anger and 
feels hatred, a wicked man, a hypocrite, he that embraces 
wrong views and is deceitful, such a one is an outcast, 
and he that has no compassion for living things.” “ Not 



438 


INDIAN PHILOSOPHY 


by birth is one a Brahmin, not by birth is one an outcast ; 
by deeds is one a Brahmin, by deeds is one an outcast.” 1 
All men had the power to become perfect. Buddha him- 
self is an example of that perfection of knowledge to which 
any man might attain by meditation and self-control. It 
is idle to think that certain men were doomed to helotry 
and infamy and others to virtue and wisdom. So members 
of all castes were admitted into the monastic order. Any- 
body could embrace Buddhism and attain to the highest 
rank by becoming a member of the Sahgha. In this way 
Buddha undermined the spirit of caste, which later developed 
inhuman practices. But this is not foreign to the Brah- 
manical theory, which also looked upon the highest status 
of the Sannyasin as above caste. We cannot say that 
Buddha abolished caste, for the religion of Buddha is an 
aristocratic one. It is full of subtleties that only the 
learned could understand, and Buddha has always in view 
the Samanas and the Brahmanas. His first converts were 
the Brahmin priests and the rich youth of Benares. We 
cannot say that Buddha effected any social revolution. 
Even birth in a Brahmin family Buddha allows to be a reward 
for merit. 2 He was a spiritual reformer in that he won 
for the poor and the lowly a place in the kingdom of God. 
“ The still very prevalent notion that Buddhism and Jainism 
were reformatory movements, and that more especially 
they represented the revolt against the tyranny of caste, 
is quite erroneous. They were only a protest against the 
caste exclusiveness of the Brahmanical ascetics ; but caste 
as such, and as existing outside their doors, was fully 
acknowledged by them. Even inside their orders admis- 
sion, though professedly open to all, was at first practi- 
cally limited to the higher castes. It is also significant for 
the attitude of these orders to the Brahmanic institutions 
of the country that, though in spiritual matters their so- 
called lay adherents were bound to their guidance, yet 
with regard to ceremonies, such as those of birth, marriage 
and death, they had to look for service to the old Brahmanic 


1 See Vasala Sutta, Vasettha Sutta, and Dhammapada, chap. xxvi. 

• See Hardy: Manual of Buddhism, p. 446. 



ETHICAL IDEALISM OF BUDDHISM 439 


priests.” 1 * 3 Buddha was not a social reformer. He felt 
most intensely that suffering was bound up with selfish- 
ness, and he preached a moral and mental discipline 
designed to root out the conceit of self. Buddha’s whole 
spirit was other-worldly, and he had not the burning enthu- 
siasm for the earthly kingdom so necessary for a social 
reformer or a national leader. “ Buddha’s spirit was a 
stranger to that enthusiasm, without which no one can 
pose as the champion of the oppressed against the oppressor. 
Let the state and society remain what they are ; the reli- 
gious man who as a monk has renounced the world has 
no part in its cares and occupations. Caste has no value 
for him, for everything earthly has ceased to affect his 
interest ; but it never occurs to him to exercise his influence 
for its abolition or for the mitigation of the severity of its 
rules for those who have lagged behind in worldly sur- 
roundings.” 1 In the world of thought both Upanisads 
and Buddhism protested against the rigours of caste. Both 
allowed the highest spiritual dignity to the poor and the 
humble, but neither rooted out the Vedic institutions and 
practices, though on this point Buddhism is a little more 
successful than Brahmanism. But the passion for social 
reform was practically unknown to even the best minds of 
those times. Democracy is a modern motive of social 
reform. 

We have already said that Buddha did not interfere 
with the domestic ritual which continued to be performed 
according to the Vedic rules. 3 So far as the authority of 
the Veda on doctrinal matters is concerned, Buddha does 
not accept it. As a general rule he denounces all exoteric 
or secret doctrines : “ O disciples, there are three to whom 
secrecy belongs and not openness — to women ... to 
priestly wisdom ... to false doctrine.” 4 "I have preached 
the truth without making any distinction between exoteric 
and esoteric doctrines, for in respect of the truths, Ananda, 
the Tathagata has no such thing as the closed fist of a 

1 Hoemle: Calcutta Review, 1898, p. 320. 

* Oldenberg : Buddha, pp. 153 - 154 - 

3 See Bhandarkar : A Peep into the Early History 0} India. 

< Aiiguttara Nikaya. 



440 INDIAN PHILOSOPHY 

teacher who keeps something back ” 1 Buddha himself 
was a reviler of the Vedas. He protested against that part 
of the Vedas which countenanced animal sacrifices. At any 
rate, such is the opinion of Jayadeva, the author of Gita- 
govinda, and Ramacandra Bharati, the author of Bhaktisataka, 
otherwise called Buddhasataka. 


XV 

Karma and Rebirth 

The law of karma is not imposed from without, but is 
worked into our very nature. The formation of mental 
habits, the increasing proneness to evil, the hardening 
influence of repetition which undermines the effective free- 
dom of the self, whether we know it or not, are compre- 
hended under the law of karma. We cannot escape from 
the effects of our acts. The past in a real sense produces 
the present and the future. The law of karma is the prin- 
ciple working out justice in human relations. “ It is 
through a difference in their karma that men are not all 
alike. But some are long lived, some short lived, some 
healthy, and some sickly, etc.” 2 Without this explanation 
men would feel themselves to be the victims of an immense 
injustice. It also helps to make the sufferer resigned, 
because he feels that through suffering he is wiping 
out an old debt. It makes the enjoyer courteous, for he 
must do good again to deserve it. When a persecuted 
disciple came to Buddha with broken head and streaming 
wounds, Buddha told him : ” Suffer it to be so, 0 Arhat 
. . . you are now feeling results of your karma that might 
have cost you centuries of suffering in purgatory.” It 
insists on individual responsibility and the reality of a 
future life. It recognises that the retribution of sin depends 
on the status of the sinner. If a man weak in mind and 
morals does an evil deed, it may lead him to the inferno. 
If a good man does it he may escape with a small pain in 
this life. “ It is as if a man were to put a lump of salt 

1 Mahaparinibbana Sutta. 

» Wilinda. Sii" Majjhima, iii. 203, and Buddhagho?a: Atthasalini, p. S 3 . 



ETHICAL IDEALISM OF BUDDHISM 441 


into a small cup of water, the water would be made salt 
and undrinkable. But if the same lump of salt were put 
into the river Ganges, the water of the Ganges would not 
be perceptibly tainted.” 1 

The theory of karma is much older than Buddhism, 
though it gets a logical justification in the philosophy of 
becoming. Men are temporary links in a long chain of 
causes and effects where no link is independent of the rest. 
The history of an individual does not begin at his birth, 
but has been for ages in the making. 

When karma becomes the supreme principle superior 
to gods and men, it is difficult to assign any place to the 
initiative and endeavour of man. If everything that 
happens is determined by it, it is hard to see why the indi- 
vidual should take thought of what he does. He cannot 
but act in harmony with the law. Salvation is another 
name for acquiescence in the course of things. Such a 
conception again and again crops up in the history of 
thought. The Greek held that there was an inexorable 
destiny higher than man or god which could not be altered 
by effort or prayer. The same dread fate appears in the 
faith of the Calvinists and the Kismet of the Muslims. 
Nobody can learn even from Buddha if he has not already 
been destined for it or done enough merit to deserve it. 
We admit that Buddha did not give a straight answer to 
the question of freedom, but put it aside as a problem of 
speculation. Yet his system allows the possibility of free 
action and ultimate conquest over the whole law of 
karma . 2 His insistence on energy and endeavour and 
struggle against hate and error is not consistent with a 
denial of freedom. His scheme has a place for repentance, 
or samvega. The following suggestions may enable us to 
reconcile the Buddhis temphasis on karma with freedom. 
The chief argument in support of determination even in 
modern thought is that from causation. Karma, according 
to Buddhism, is not a mechanical principle, but is organic 
in character. The self grows and expands. There is no 
self, but only an evolving consciousness which may be 
spread out in a series of states. Though the present is 

1 Afijrittara Nikjya, i 149. * See Milinda, iv. 8 30-41. 



442 INDIAN PHILOSOPHY 

determined by the past, the future remains open and 
depends on the direction of our will. The determination of 
the present by the past is not, however, a merely mechanical 
one. The law of karma tells us that there is continuity 
between the past and the present, that the present accords 
with the past This does not mean that the present is the 
only possible outcome of the past. “ O priests, if any- 
one says that a man must reap according to his deeds, in 
that case there is no religious life, nor is any opportunity 
offered for the entire extinction of misery. But if anyone 
says, 0 priests, that a reward a man reaps accords with 
his deeds, in that case, O priests, there is a religious life, 
and opportunity is afforded for the entire extinction of 
misery.” 1 A mechanical misinterpretation of the law of 
karma conflicts with the claims of ethics and religion. 

The whole difficulty of the problem is due to the psycho- 
logical orientation of Buddha’s outlook. The analysis of 
the self into a sum of qualities, tendencies and disposi- 
tions, is perfectly legitimate for psychological science with 
its restricted object. For psychology which traces the rise 
and growth of mental presentations and establishes causal 
connexions among them determinism holds. But it can 
never adequately explain the constitution of the unitary 
self. If W’e do not emphasise the subjective factor, the 
principle for which alone mental facts are facts of mind, 
w-e misinterpret the nature of the self. When we isolate it 
from its contents, it becomes a logical abstraction, which is 
not w’hat determines our activities. Our w'hole self at any 
moment is the subject of our activity, and it has in it the 
capacity to transcend its past. The self apart from the 
contents is characterless and barren ; the contents alone 
without the self support perfect determinism, for the con- 
crete self freedom is a fact. To say that nothing happenc 
without a cause is not inconsistent with holding that the 
present state of the self may act as a cause. Buddhism 
only protests against the unscientific view of indeterminism 
which regards freewill as an incalculable force which some- 
how interferes with the orderly working of mind. There is 
more in the world than mechanical law, though there is a 

1 Afiguttara Nikaya, iii. 99. 



ETHICAL IDEALISM OF BUDDHISM 448 


perfect natural history of the thoughts and desires of the 
individual. Karma asserts this orderliness of natural pro- 
cess as well as spiritual growth. It is not intended to 
remove responsibility or invalidate effort, for nothing great 
can be achieved without effort. 

When we attain the highest condition, it is said that 
karma has no effect. All the past deeds with their results 
vanish for ever. The condition of freedom is beyond good 
and evil. It is often said that morality ceases to be of 
transcendental worth when moral acts are looked upon as 
an obstruction to final bliss, in so far as they inevitably 
bring about a reward and maintain the round of existence. 
We must get rid of both merit and demerit to escape from 
this life. All moral conduct is a preparation for the final 
state. When the ideal is realised the struggle ceases. There 
is no effect to be produced in any future existence. It is 
the Upanisud doctrine that whatever the individual who 
has attained liberation does, he does without attachment. 
It is not deeds in themselves that bring about results, but 
deeds springing from selfish desires. The highest condition 
is therefore above moral rules and the operation of the 
law of karma, yet morality has an organic bearing on the end. 

The rotating wheel is the symbol of the series of lives 
determined by the principles of karma. The dissolution of 
the old is the formation of the new. Death is nothing 
but birth cradled in flames. Throughout life there are 
changes. Birth and death are vital changes to which we 
attach names. When the mass of actions meant to receive 
retribution here is exhausted, death occurs. The wheel of 
life presents us with fresh opportunities where, if we choose, 
we may improve our fate. In this wheel are not only men, 
but all living things constantly ascending and descending. 

Buddha, following the Brahmanical theory, presents hell 
for the wicked and rebirth for the imperfect. A heaven 
is also recognised. " On the dissolution of the body after 
death, the well-doer is reborn in some happy state in 
heaven.” 1 Sometimes both heaven and hell are looked 
upon as temporary states before rebirth happens. Early 
Buddhism popularised the conception of rebirth by the 

* Mahaparinibbana, i. 24. 

15 


VOL. I 



444 INDIAN PHILOSOPHY 

tales of the Jatakas relating the previous births of Buddha 
and the many deeds of self-sacrifice by which he prepared 
himself for the final victory over evil in the great conflict 
under the Bo tree. It is said that we can see the infinite 
past of every life if we develop certain supernatural powers. 

There is no such thing in Buddhism as the migration of 
the soul or the passage of an individual from life to life. 
When a man dies his physical organism, which is the basis 
of his psychical dissolves, and so the psychical life comes to 
an end. It is not the dead man who comes to rebirth but 
another. There is no soul to migrate. It is the character 
that continues . 1 Buddhism does not explain the mechanism 
by which the continuity of karma is maintained between 
two lives separated by the phenomenon of death. It 
simply assumes it. We are told that the successive lives 
are linked by a chain of natural causation. The resulting 
character builds up a new individuality which gravitates 
automatically to the state of life for which it is fitted. It 
is said that owing to the strength of karma the conscious- 
ness of the dying man begets or begins a series of states 
of consciousness coupled with a subtle organism, the last 
of which takes up its abode in some matrix . 2 The decisive 
element is generally looked upon as the last thought which 
becomes the essence of the moral and intellectual life of 
the dying man. It is the force which remains as a desire 
for new life when death occurs. There must not only be 
this karma or force resulting from actions, but also upadana, 
or clinging to existence. Since life is a combination, if the 
separated elements do not come together, there w r ould be 
no life. There must be a force at w'ork which tends to 
recombine the scattered elements. Under the pressure of 
this force of attraction called upadana, a new combination 
results. Karma could do nothing without it. Karma is 
an informing principle waiting for its material. 

“ For when in any existence one arrives at the gate of 
death, either in the natural course of things or through 
violence ; and when by a concourse of intolerable, death- 
dealing pains, all the members, both great and small, are 

1 See Abhidharmakosa, iii. 24. 

* See Poussin : The Way to Nirvana, pp. 83-84. 



ETHICAL IDEALISM OF BUDDHISM 445 


loosened and wrenched apart in every joint and ligament ; 
and the body, like a green palm-leaf exposed to the sun 
dries up by degrees ; and the eyesight and the other senses 
fail , and the power of feeling, and the power of thinking 
and vitality are making the last stand in the heart — then 
consciousness residing in that last refuge, the heart con- 
tinues to exist by virtue of karma, otherwise called the 
predispositions. This karma, however, still retains some- 
thing of what it depends on, and consists of such former 
deeds as were weighty, much practised, and are now close at 
hand ; or else this karma creates a reflection of itself or 
of the new mode of life now being entered upon, and it is 
with this as its object that consciousness continues to exist. 

“ Now, while consciousness still subsists, inasmuch as 
desire and ignorance have not been abandoned and the 
evil of the object is hidden by that ignorance, desire inclines 
the consciousness to the object ; and the karma that 
sprang up along with the consciousness impels it toward 
the object. This consciousness being in its series thus 
inclined toward the object by desire and impelled toward 
it by karma, like a man who swings himself over a ditch 
by means of a rope hanging from a tree on the higher bank, 
quits its first resting-place and continues to subsist in 
dependence on objects of sense and other things, and either 
does or does not light on another resting-place created by 
karma. Here the former consciousness, from its passing 
out of existence, is called passing away, and the latter, 
from its being reborn into a new existence, is called rebirth. 
But it is to be understood that this latter consciousness 
did not come to the present existence from the previous 
one, and also that it is only to causes contained in the old 
existence, namely, to karma or predisposition, to inclination, 
. . . that its present appearance is due.” 1 

A distinction is made between animals, ghosts and men on 
the one hand, gods and creatures in hell or demons on the 

1 Buddhaghosa Visuddhimagga, chap, xvii ; see W.B.T., pp. 238-230. 
For an example of an attempt made by mediaeval Buddhist psychology to 
account for rebirth or conception, or patisandhi, we may refer the reader 
to Mr. Aung’s translation of Anuruddha’s Abhidhammatthasafigaha, 
specially the Introductory essay. 



446 


INDIAN PHILOSOPHY 


other . 1 The latter are apparitional and their birth-conscious- 
ness can make for itself a new body out of unorganised matter. 
With animals, ghosts and men birth-consciousness presup- 
poses physical circumstances, and if they are not realised 
at the moment of death, the dying consciousness cannot 
be continued at once into the birth-consciousness of a new 
being. For such being an intermediary existence in a 
short-lived Gandharva form is allowed. This Gandharva, 
like a discarnate spirit, creates at the earliest opportunity 
with the help of conceptional elements the proper embryo. 

The causal explanation of continuity accounts for 
rebirth also. The man who is reborn is the heir of the 
action of the dead man. Yet he is a new being. While 
there is nc permanent identity there is at the same time 
no annihilation or cutting off. The new being is what 
its acts have made it. This theory of the survival of 
karma is suggested in the Upanisads, in the conversation 
between Artabhaga and Yajnavalkya in the Brhadaranyaka 
Upanisad. 

While the main tendency of Buddhism is to make 
karma the surviving element, there are also indications 
that vijnana is sometimes assigned that function. “ All 
that we are is the result of what we have thought.” 
Vijnana is said to constitute in a real sense the substance 
of our soul.” 2 It only shows the close kinship between 
vijnana and karma, thought and will. In the highest 
condition of nirvana we are free from karma as well as 
vijnana, and all sorrow ceases with the disruption of 
personality. Karma keeps going the life process, and when 
it is exhausted individual existence terminates. 


XVI 

Nirvana 

” Now this is the noble truth as to the passing of pain. 
Verily it is the passing away so that no passion remains, 

1 See Aung and Rhys Davids: Compendium o] Philosophy, pp. 137-139. 
> It is interesting to know that even according to Hume personal identity 
arises solely from the " smooth and uninterrupted progress of thought along 
a train of connected ideas.” 



ETHICAL IDEALISM OF BUDDHISM 447 


the giving up, the getting rid of, the emancipation from, 
the harbouring no longer of this craving thirst.” Buddha 
did not face the question of the nature of nirvana directly. 
He felt that his mission was not so much to unveil the secrets 
of blessedness as to win men to its realisation. To him 
the all-absorbing topic was the suffering of life. The word 
nirvana literally means " blowing out ” or “ cooling.” 
Blowing out suggests extinction. Cooling suggests not 
complete annihilation, but only the dying out of hot 
passion. “ The mind released is like the extinction of 
a flame.” 1 These two implications of nirvana are to be 
met with as the negative and the positive sides of the one 
ultimate state of being which cannot be adequately 
described in terms of thought. At any rate, nirvana, 
according to Buddhism, is not the blessed fellowship with 
God, for that is only a perpetuation of the desire for life. 
That Buddha means only the extinction of false desire and 
not all existence comes out from a large number of passages. 
Nirvana is only the destruction of the fires of lust, hatred 
and ignorance. Only in this sense of nirvana can we 
understand Buddha’s attainment of bodhi at the age of 
thirty-five and his spending the remaining forty-five years 
of his life in active preaching and doing good. Sometimes 
a distinction is drawn between two kinds of nirvana : 
(i) Upadhisesa, where only the human passions are 
extinct, and (2) Anupadhisesa, where all being is extinct. 
According to Childers, the former indicates the condition 
of a perfect saint where the five skandhas are still present, 
though the desire which attracts us to being is extinct. 
In the latter we have the cessation of all being consequent 
on the death of the saint. It seems to be a distinction 
between the free whose external life continues and those 
whose external life ceases. Whenever it is said that people 
attain nirvana in this world, the Upadhisesa nirvana is 
meant. It is the arhatship which becomes parinirvana 
when the arhat disappears from the world of the transitory. 


* DIgha Nikaya, ii. 15. See also Majjhima 72, where Buddha compares 
nirvana to the expiring flame which has no more any hay or wood to burn. 
6veta£vatara Upanisad (iv. 19) speaks of the Paramatman as the fire the 
fuel of which has been consumed. See also Nrsimhottaratapaniya Up. 2. 



448 


INDIAN PHILOSOPHY 


The distinction of UpadhEesa and AnupadhEesa thus 
corresponds to that between nirvana and parinirvana, 
dying out and complete dying out. 1 There is no strict 
usage on this question. 2 Even parinirvana cannot mean 
absolute non-being. It only means absolute perfection of 
being. “ Final deliverance is declared by the sage Buddha 
to be nothing other than a flow of faultless states of con- 
sciousness.” 3 It is mental repose free from stress and 
conflict. The suppression of the evil tendencies is accom- 
panied by a simultaneous spiritual progress. Nirvana, 
which is the consummation of the spiritual struggle, is a 
positive blessedness. It is the goal of perfection and not 
the abyss of annihilation. Through the destruction of all 
that is individual in us, we enter into communion with 
the whole universe and become an integral part of the 
great purpose. Perfection is then the sense of oneness with 
all that is, lias ever been and can ever be. The horizon 
of being is extended to the limits of reality. It is a kind 
of existence devoid of egoity, a timeless existence, full of 
"confidence, peace, calm, bliss, happiness, delicacy, purity, 
freshness.” 4 There are passages in Milinda which indi- 
cate that Buddha after parinirvana ceased to exist. “ The 
Blessed One passed away by that kind of passing away 
in which no root remains for the formation of another indi- 
vidual. The Blessed One has come to an end and it can- 
not be pointed out of him that he is here or there. But 
in the body of his doctrine he can be pointed out.” 5 We 
cannot worship Buddha because he is no more, and so we 
worship his relics and doctrines. 6 Nagasena lends colour 
to the conception of nirvana as extinction, or cessation of 
all activities (cittavrttinirodha), cessation of all becoming 
(bhavanirodha), yet we feel that to some early Buddhists 
nirvana meant completeness of being, eternal beatitude 
exalted high above the joys and sorrows of the world. 


> Milinda, ii. 2. 4. * See Oldenberg: Excursus on Nirdnva, iii. 

3 S.S S.S., ii. 4. 21. « Milinda, ii. 2. 9 ; iii. 4. 6 ; ii. 1. 6. 

5 Milinda, i-.i. 5. 10. It suggests the thought embodied in George 

idiot's Choir Invisible, or Maeterlinck’s Blue Bird, the survival in the memory 
of posterity. 

* iv. 1 ; see also Samyutta, i. 



ETHICAL IDEALISM OF BUDDHISM 449 


“ The Tathagata, O Vaccha, when thus liberated from the 
category of materiality, is deep, immeasurable, difficult 
to fathom, like the great ocean.” The nun Khema assures 
Pasenadi of Kosala that death releases the Tathagata from 
the empirical existence of the five skandhas. Sariputta 
lebukes Yamaka for holding the heretical view that a 
monk in whom sin is ended would be cut off. Max 
Muller and Childers, after a systematic examination of 
all passages relating to nirvana, conclude that “ there is 
not one passage which would require that its mean- 
ing should be annihilation.” It is dear that it is the 
false individuality that disappears while the true being 
remains. Even as the rainbow is a mixture of fact and 
imagination, so is individuality a combination of being 
and non-being. The falling raindrops are the rupa, the 
line of light is the nama, and the product of their crossing is 
bhava, or the rainbow, which is an appearance, an illusion. 
But it has something real as its basis that is eternal. 
“ The world rests upon me only in so far as it, as the known, 
stands opposed to me, as the knower. Only the form can 
be known, not that upon which it is based. Wherefore 
the world can only be done away with through knowledge— 
i.e. only in so far as it is form. Only so far as it is form 
does it arise and pass away, is it a becoming, and becoming 
can have an ending. That, however, upon which form is 
based, the elementary — that is being ; and never and 
nowhere can being pass into non-being ; never and nowhere 
can what is eternal come to an end.” 1 Nirvana is an 
eternal condition of being, for it is not a sarhskara, or what 
is made or put together, which is impermanent. It con- 
tinues while its expressions change. This is what lies 
behind the skandhas, which are subject to birth and decay. 
The illusion of becoming is founded on the reality of nirvana. 
Buddha does not attempt to define it, since it is the root 
principle of all, and so is indefinable. It is said that in 
nirvana, which is compared to deep sleep, the soul loses 
its individuality and lapses into the objective whole. Accord- 
ing to the view emphasised in later Mahayana works, 
what is is the bliavanga, or the stream of being. The 

1 Dalilke : Buddhist Essays, p. 258. 



450 INDIAN PHILOSOPHY 

wind of ignorance blows over it and stirs its equable flow, 
causing vibrations in the ocean of existence. The sleeping 
soul is wakened and its calm unfettered course is arrested. 
It wakes up, thinks, builds an individuality and isolates 
itself from the stream of being. In deep sleep these barriers 
are broken. Nirvana is getting back into the stream of 
being and resuming the uninterrupted flow. Even as no 
thought waves perturb the stream of being when a man 
sleeps, so also in nirvana do we have peaceful rest. 
Nirvana is neither annihilation nor existence as we con- 
ceive it, but is becoming one with the eternal reality, 
which Buddha does not explicitly admit. Only since it 
is beyond the horizon of human thought we are obliged 
to employ negative terms to describe it. It is a condition 
transcending subject-object relations. In it there is no 
trace of self-consciousness. It is a state of activity which 
is not subject to causality, for it is unconditioned freedom . 1 
It is a state real and enduring, though not existent in 
the world of time and space. The psalms of the elders 
and the nuns are full of eloquent descriptions of the deep 
joy and the immortal delight of nirvana surpassing all 
description. The individual consciousness enters into a 
state where all relative existence is dissolved. It is the 
silent beyond. In one sense it is self-extinction, in another 
absolute freedom. It is the fading of the star in the 
brilliant rise of the sun or the melting of the white cloud 
in the summer air. To think that nirvana is annihilation 
is according to Buddha “ a wicked heresy.” 1 

Though the nirvanic condition is represented as imply- 
ing the highest kind of activity, still it is viewed predomi- 
nantly in a negative way as passive. In an age when this 
world, full of life, bustle and excitement, gave no hope to 
men who were growing tired of existence, the perfect condi- 
tion comes to be represented as more restful than romantic, 
a state of peace and happiness, stillness and calm, rest 
and refreshment. The ceaseless flux of rebirth is felt 
with such power that nirvana, or the condition in which 
the flux is said to be stayed, is hailed as a blessed release. 

Buddha, with the Upanisad thinkers, refused to allow 

' Cf ^nnyatanimittapranihitam. * Sariiyiitta, iii. 109. 



ETHICAL IDEALISM OF BUDDHISM 451 


any speculations about the condition of men who attain 
nirvana, since it is not an object of knowledge. Yet in 
the way of the Upanisads he gives descriptions of it both 
positive and negative. In the Tevijja Sutta he even allows 
it to be called union with Brahma. Since such a descrip- 
tion does not consist with the view which makes Buddha 
a negative thinker, denying any abiding principle in man 
and the world, Rhys Davids says : “ In holding out a 

hope of union with Brahma as a result of the practice of 
universal love, the Buddha is most probably intended to 
mean a ‘ union with Brahma ’ in the Buddhist sense, that 
is to say, a temporary companionship as a separate being 
with the Buddhist Brahma, to be enjoyed by a new indi- 
vidual not consciously identical with its predecessor. It is 
just possible that the argmnentum ad hominem should be 
extended to this part of the sutta, and that the statement 
in iii. i should be taken to mean : ‘ This (universal love) is 
the only way to that kind of union with your own Brahma 
which you desire.’ But such a yielding to heretical 

opinion at the close of his own exposition of the truth 
would scarcely be imputed to a Buddha.” 1 Rhys Davids 
forgets that it is no heresy according to Buddha. If we 
look upon nirvana as a positive condition we must admit 
the reality of a permanent. Logic is a hard task-master. 
Buddha is obliged to admit a permanent principle. 
“ There is, O disciples, a something that is not born, not 
produced, not created, not compounded. Were there 
not, 0 disciples, this something not born . . . there would 
be no possible exit for what is born.” 2 It is also clear 
that the reduction of self to a number of skandhas is not 
ultimate. If the self is merely an impermanent compound 
of body and mind, qualities and functions, then when it 
disappears there is nothing wdiich is delivered. We destroy 
our desires, burn our karma and are lost for ever. Free- 
dom becomes extinction. But nirvana is timeless existence, 
and so Buddha must admit the reality of a timeless self. 
There is a being at the back of all life which is uncondi- 
tioned, above all empirical categories, something which 

* Introduction to Tevijja Sutta, S.B.E., vol. xi., p. 161. 

» Udana, viii. 3, and Itivuttaka, 43. 

15 * 


VOL. I 



452 INDIAN PHILOSOPHY 

does not give rise to any effect and is not the effect of any- 
thing else. “ Of nirvana we cannot say that it has arisen, 
or that it has not arisen, or that it can arise ; that it is 
past or future or present.” 1 Nirvana is the simultaneity 
which is the support of all succession. Concrete time 
loses itself in the eternal. The shifting nature of the world 
conceals the stable reality. Only such a view is necessary 
to complete Buddha’s account of nirvana. Buddha did 
not trouble himself about the definition of these trans- 
cendental concepts which he felt to be real, for they did 
not help life and progress. In accord with his teaching 
about Malunkyaputta’s questions that he would discuss 
only those problems that have a bearing on progress in 
peace, holiness and enlightenment, and not others, he dis- 
allowed the question of the ultimate goal. A deliberate 
dismissal or an evasive answer to such a vital problem 
cannot suppress the tendency to raise it. It is an instinct 
of the human mind that engenders the problem. And 
when Buddha failed to give an orthodox solution, different 
schools derived different conclusions from his attitude. 
Some reduce nirvana to sunyata, vacuity and nihility. 
Bishop Bigandet says : “ By an inexplicable and deplorable 
eccentricity, the system promises men as a reward for 
their moral efforts the bottomless gulf of annihilation.” 
According to Mrs. Rhys Davids, ” the nirvana of Buddhism 
is simply extinction.” Oldenberg inclines to a negative 
view. 2 Dahlke frequently suggests it. In one place he 
writes: ‘‘Only in Buddhism does the conception freedom 
from pain remain purely a negative thing and not a positive 
in disguise — heavenly bliss.” 3 According to these writers 
nirvana is the night of nothingness, the darkness where 
all light is extinguished. Such a one-sided reading of 
Buddha’s theory is not new. Buddha, after having declared 
that the condition of the liberated one is inconceivable, 
continues: “Teaching this, explaining this, I am falsely, 
without reason, wrongly, not truthfully accused by some. 
... ‘ An unbeliever is the samana Gotama, the real 
entity’s destruction, annihilation, dying away is what he 
preaches.’ What I am not, what is not my doctrine, 

* Milmda. * See Buddha, p. 273. i Buddhist Essays, p. 48. 



ETHICAL IDEALISM OF BUDDHISM 453 


that I am accused of.” 1 Strange to say there are 
others who look upon the Buddhist nil /Sna as so 
positively pleasurable that they charge Buddha with 
hedonism. Evidently, two different views were developed 
very early on the basis of Buddha’s utterances. Buddha’s 
real attitude is probably, that nirvana is a state of per- 
fection inconceivable by us, and if we are obliged to offer 
descriptions of it, it is best to bring out its inconceivability 
by negative descriptions, its richness of content by positive 
predicates, realising all the time that such descriptions are 
at best approximations only. 

XVII 

Attitude to God 

In the prevailing religion of the period of Buddha, the 
dominant feature was the spirit of barter established 
between gods and men. While the Brahman of the Upani- 
sads was high and noble, yet ever so many gods, the 
heavenly orbs as well as the material elements, plants as 
well as animals, mountains as well as rivers, were popularly 
accepted. The unbridled license of a wild imagination 
deified all possible objects of the world, and as if these 
were not enough, added to them monsters, shapes and 
symbols of fancy. The Upanisads, no doubt, shattered 
the authority of these gods in the world of thought, but 
did not disturb their sway in the world of practice. So 
men were not wanting who paraded the gods as the 
creators of the world and governors of the universe able 
to affect for good or ill the destiny of man. Buddha 
realised that the only way to remove the haunting fear of 
the gods, the threatened torments of the future and the 
corruption of the human spirit, inclined to buy the good- 
will of the gods by flattery and praise, was to destroy the 
gods once and for all. The idea of a first cause does not 
help us in moral progress. It leads to inaction and irre- 
sponsibility. If God exists, He must be the sole cause 
of all that happens, good as well as evil, and man can have 
no freedom of his own. If He abhors wickedness and dis- 
owns the authorship of evil, then He is not a universal 

» Majjhima, 22. 



454 INDIAN PHILOSOPHY 

agent. We expect to be forgiven by God. 1 If the grace 
of God is all powerful, if it can make in an instant 
a saint of a criminal, we are tempted to be indif- 
ferent to the virtuous life and cultivation of character. 
Character building is so much labour lost. Heaven and 
hell merely happen to be the reward of virtue and vice. 
If evil-doing means hell, men feel that hell is a long way 
off, while simple pleasure is next door to us. Buddha had 
to oppose the prevailing view and declare that virtue and 
happiness, vice and suffering are organically related. 2 The 
uncertain nature of philosophical speculation which indulged 
in all sorts of fancies, and the practical conviction which 
made men throw the burden on gods rather than rely on 
their own efforts, led Buddha to confine his teaching to 
this world. A strictly scientific attitude sees no god in 
the thunderbolt or angels in heaven. Religious illusion 
was dissolved by the natural interpretation of things. 
The hypothesis of a personal God seemed inconsistent with 
it. The law of karma requires us to reject all notions of 
favouritism, caprice and arbitrariness. The majesty of 
God and the prestige of Providence pale before this prin- 
ciple of karma. Not a hair can drop from the head, not a 
stone can fall to the ground without the decree of karma. 
A God who can neither adapt nor alter, neither produce 
nor modify, is no God at all. Moreover, it is not easy to 
reconcile the heart-rending facts of life with the belief in 
a loving God. The suffering of the world is intelligible only 
on the hypothesis of karma. It explains all about the 
world of living beings, inhabitants of hell, animals, ghosts, 
men and gods. There is nothing superior to karma. 
Though Buddha admits the existence of deities like Indra, 
Varuna, etc., for purposes of explanation they are un- 
necessary. Even they are involved in the round of births 
and cannot interfere with the solemn law of moral causa- 
tion.3 There is no divine author of our being. A man 
is born from his own deeds. Even what parents he has 
depends on his karma. “ My action is my possession . . . 

1 " God will forgive me, for that is His business ” (Heine). 

* See Anguttara Nikaya, 6. I. 

J See Dialogues of Buddha, i, pp. 280 S, 302. 



ETHICAL IDEALISM OF BUDDHISM 455 


my inheritance . . . the matrix which bears me . . . the 
race to which I belong . . . my refuge.” The view of 
the orthodox that there is a supreme personal creator, 
Isvara, and the view of the materialists (svabhavavada) 
that the development of the world is due to the innate 
independent power of things, are both repudiated by the 
Buddhists. The diversity of the world comes from acts. 1 
Actions bear a fruit of mastery. They create and organise 
the material things necessary to their reward. If a man 
is destined to be born a sun god, then not only is he born, 
but he gets an abode, a celestial palace, a moving chariot, 
etc., as the fruit of mastery. 2 Even so at the beginning of 
the cosmic period the whole material universe is created 
by the mastering energy of the acts to be enjoyed by the 
future inhabitants. The receptacle of the world (bhajana- 
loka) is the fruit of the mastery of the acts of all living 
beings (sattvaloka). 

The traditional arguments in support of the existence 
of God were disputed by the early Buddhists. The proof 
that as a watch implies a watchmaker, even so the world 
implies a God is offensive to them. We need not have a 
conscious cause. Even as the seed develops into the 
germ, and the germ into the branch, we can have produc- 
tion without a thinking cause or a ruling providence. 
Thoughts and things are the fruit of acts even in the same 
way as pleasant and unpleasant sensations are. Milinda 
compares the cycle of existence determined by karma to a 
wheel which recoils on itself or with the reciprocal genera- 
tion of the hen from the egg, and the egg from the hen. 
Eye, ear, body and spirit come into contact with the 
world, occasioning sensation, desire, action, etc., and the 
fruit of these is again an eye, an ear, a body, a spirit that 
will make a new being. This is the everlasting law of 
righteousness. We cannot alter its course. Buddha, more 
a teacher than a saviour, helps us to see the truth. He 
does not imagine a world-maker far back in the ages, 
beginning the series of samsara. The flow of the world has 
no other cause beside itself. To him the cosmological argu- 

i Karmajam lokavaicitryam, Abhidharmakosa, iv. I. 

• Adhipatipkala. 



456 INDIAN PHILOSOPHY 

ment had no force. Enough if we know how things happen. 
We need not go behind the order of the world. Though 
an explanation by antecedent conditions is no final truth, 
still to man nothing more is open. A first cause which is 
itself uncaused seems to be self-contradictory. The neces- 
sity of conceiving every cause as effect which has its cause 
in a preceding one makes the conception of an uncaused 
cause absolutely unthinkable. Similarly, the teleological 
argument is untenable in view of the obvious imperfection 
of the world. The world seems to be an ingenious contriv- 
ance for inflicting suffering. Nothing could be more elaborate 
and masterly in its perfection than this scheme of pain. A 
perfect Creator cannot be the author of this imperfect 
world. Neither a benevolent God nor caprice, but a law 
which works with a fatal logic, is the truth of things. Buddha 
would agree with Spinoza in the view that the world is 
neither good nor bad, neither heartless nor irrational, 
neither perfect nor beautiful. It is man’s anthropo- 
morphism that makes him look upon the cosmic process 
as a sort of human activity. Nature obeys no laws im- 
posed from without. We have only necessities in nature . 1 

1 In a conversation with Anathapiqdika Buddha is said to have argued the 
question thus : " If the world had been made by ISvara, there should be no 
change nor destruction, there should be no such thing as sorrow or calamity, as 
right or wrong, seeing that all things, pure and impure, must come from 
him. If sorrow and joy, love and hate, which spring up in all conscious 
beings, be the work of Isvara, he himself must be capable of sorrow and 
joy, love and hatred, and if he has these, how can he be said to be perfect ? 
If ISvara be the maker, and if all beings have to submit silently to their 
maker’s power, what would be the use of practising virtue ? The doing 
of right or wrong would be the same, as all deeds are his making and must 
be the same with their maker. But if sorrow and suffering are attributed 
to another cause, then there would be something of which Isvara is not 
the cause. Why, then, should not all that exists be uncaused too ? Again, 
if Isvara be the maker, he acts either with or without a purj osc. If he 
acts with a purpose, he cannot be said to be all perfect, for a purpose neces- 
sarily implies satisfaction of a want. If he acts without a purpose, he must 
be like the lunatic or suckling babe. Besides, if Isvara be the maker, why 
should not people reverently submit to him, why should they oiler supplica- 
tions to him when sorely pressed by necessity ? And why should people 
adore more gods than one ? Thus the idea uf ISvara is proved false by 
rational argument, and all such contradictory assertions should be exposed.” 
(ASvaghosa’s Buddhacarita.) " If, as theists say, God is too great for 
man to be able to comprehend Him, then it follows that His qualities also 
surpass our range of thought, and that we can neither know Him nor 



ETHICAL IDEALISM OF BUDDHISM 457 


XVIII 

The Implications of Karma 

The oppressing sense of the mechanical samsara produces 
a passionate longing for an escape from it. This pessi- 
mistic outlook is inevitable so long as the premises are 
granted. On account of its metaphysical agnosticism 
Buddhism could not emphasise the Upanisad idea of a 
divine plan of samsara arranged to help the spiritual evolu- 
tion of man. The whole conception without a spiritual 
background seems to be devoid of any point except it 
be to convince us of the purposelessness of all existence. 
But the necessity of karma and the reality of spirit 
are different ways of expressing the one truth. While 

karma does not consist with special miracles, it need 
not be interpreted as excluding a constant spiritual 
activity. It disallows only the capricious God, who 
is not found everywhere and always, but here and 
there and at rare intervals. Abstract intellect which 

attribute to Him the quality of a creator” (Rodhicaryavatara) . If the 
world has not been created by Isvara. may not all existence be a mani- 
festation of the absolute, the unconditioned, the unknowable behind 
all appearances ? ” Said the Blessed One to Anathapindika : ' If by the 

absolute is meant something out of relation to all known things, its existence 
cannot be established by any reasoning (hetu vidyasastra) . How can we 
know that anything unrelated to other things exists at all ? The whole 
universe, as we know it, is a system of relations : we know nothing that 
is, or can be, unrelated. How can that which depends on nothing and is 
related to nothing produce things which are related to one another and 
depend for their existence upon one another ? Again, the absolute is one 
or many. If it be only one, how can it be the cause of the different things 
which originate, as we know, from dilferent causes ? If there be as many 
different absolutes as there are things, how can the latter be related to one 
another ? If the absolute pervades all things and fills all space, 
then it cannot also make them, for there is nothing to make. Further, 
if the absolute is devoid of all qualities (nirguna), all things arising 
from it ought likewise to be devoid of qualities. Cut in realitv all 
things in the world are circumscribed throughout by qualities. Hence the 
absolute cannot be their cause. If the absolute be considered to be different 
from the qualities, how does it continually create the things possessing such 
qualities and manifest itself in them ? Again, if the absolute be unchangeable, 
all things should be unchangeable too, for the effect cannot differ in nature 
from the cause. But all things in the woiid undergo change and decay. IIuw 



458 


INDIAN PHILOSOPHY 


moves among ideas and concepts reduces the concrete 
reality of the world to the most general terms. There are 
in the Upanisads also such abstract representations of 
Brahman divorcing it from its concrete existence in life 
and consciousness. The Infinite is beyond the reach of 
vision and thought. Such a transcendental conception 
which we may call indifferently an infinite zero or an inex- 
pressible reality, the nameless nihil, indefinable, 1 self-less 2 
and base-less, 3 is of no use in life. Buddha calls it the 
fiction of the metaphysician. 3 This warning was needed at 
a time when people were losing their moral energy in the 
ecstatic apprehension of the absolute. At best, since the 
reality of such an infinite is incapable of verification, we 
must leave it an open question. Buddha asks us to sus- 
pend judgment where knowledge is impossible. If relativity 
is a necessary condition of thought, then it applies to the 
thought of God also. Let us therefore give up the attempt 
to define the absolute and look at pratyak, or the actual, 
and not at the parak, or the transcendent. We have defi- 
nite knowledge of the phenomenal flow. By his own insist- 

then can the absolute be unchangeable ? Moreover, if the absolute which 
pervades all is the cause of everything, why should we seek liberation ? 
For we ourselves possess this absolute and must patiently endure every suffer- 
ing and sorrow incessantly created by the absolute ” (Asvaghosa’s Buddha- 
canta). S.S.S.S. gives an account of the arguments of later Buddhism against 
the theistic systems of Nyaya-Vaisesika. (i) We cannot maintain the 
creatorship of God logically. (2) If He is the Lord of the world. He leads 
men to the practice of unrighteousness also. (3) If He is the authority 
for religious scriptures, how can His contradictory language be authoritative ? 
(4) If He is only the agent for the virtuous, then He is not infinite, not being 
all. (5) Has He in creation any end in view, any self-interest in the matter ? 
If He has, He is imperfect ; if He has not, why did He trouble about creation 
at all ? Does He undertake to do that which is profitless ? If His activity 
be mere diversion, He seems to play like a little child. (6) The existence 
of a God makes man helpless, for being unavoidably impelled by Him he 
goes to heaven or hell. (7) What is the good of suggesting that people 
are tortured for the pleasure of the Lord ? (8) If He is free to bestow 

boons, He may do so even upon the wicked and the vicious, and it is open 
to Him to send the virtuous to hell. (9) If He bestows gifts according to 
the karmas of the individuals, then all men are lords like Him. Being 
devoid of freedom in the matter of granting gifts, why is He to be called 
the Lord of all ? (iv. 23-38). It is to be noted that the three works here 
referred to belong to later Buddhism. 

■ Anirdesyam. » Anatmyam. 

* Anilayanam. 4 Brahmajala Sutta, i. 36, 



ETHICAL IDEALISM OF BUDDHISM 459 


ence on the causal connexions of phenomena, he seems to 
support the view that there is no ultimate spirit behind 
this ancient shoreless sea of forms incomprehensibly inter- 
changing, no unknown God who with His protean magic 
or maya shapes and reshapes for ever all cosmic being. 
Still, the explicit teaching of the Upanisads, which is 
nowhere denied by Buddha , 1 is necessary to give complete- 
ness to the doctrine of Buddha. According to both the 
Upanisads and Buddhism, it is the fate of man’s life to 
be restless, capricious and tragic. But this pain is not the 
whole of it. The Upanisads argue that the parade;-: of 
the world, its caprice, its tragedy, are the witnesses to the 
life of the spirit. They are there to provoke the spiritual 
power of man and give him victory. Contradiction is at 
the heart of things, because the world is spiritual. Buddha 
admits that we should conquer the passions of sin to attain 
the joy of spirit. It is misleading to think that the lowly 
passions are all and caprice is at the centre of the universe. 
Buddha allows that endurance is the essence of spirituality, 
courage the vital energy of truth. If we exaggerate one 
essential element of a divine arrangement, then we tend to 
look upon the world as godless. A whole view tells us 
that it is possible for us to catch the rhythm and pulse- 
beat of the spirit that is working even through the so-called 
caprice of nature. Without such an idea there will be no 
gleam of purpose in the world. The theory that the world 
is moving to a higher morality and a deeper wisdom will 
lose its sense. Surely Buddha does not view the world as 
purposeless un-reason. It is not a becoming without end 
or aim, mere sound and fury signifying nothing. Such a 
view would be the death of all idealism. Buddha dis- 
cerned in the succession of events the working out of a 
deep design. The world of passing events reflects the 
reality of an idea, cedi it karma or the law of righteous- 
ness. There is no law against this law. Except against 

1 There is no passage where the Buddhist texts refer to the Brahman, 
of the Upanisads, even for polemical purposes. " The Brahman as the 
universal one is not alluded to by the Buddhists either as an element of 
an alien or of their own creed, though they very frequently mention the 
God BrahmS.” (Oldenlx rg : Buddhv.) 



INDIAN PHILOSOPHY 


4G0 

the background of this absolute eternal value, the show of 
the world is a mere phantasmagoria. The discipline of 
karma is purifying and remedial. Its operation is the 
energising of a vital law. It is the business of man to so 
order his life as to bring it into harmony with this law. 
The world was, is and will be ruled by righteousness. While 
a personal creator is disputed by Buddha, this eternal 
principle is not. Buddha will not say that the principle 
of karma is an entirely mindless energy. It is not an 
unintelligent principle that frames the ions and the elec- 
trons, that gathers the atoms into molecules and the worlds. 
There is nothing to tell us that Buddha denied the reality 
of an eternal self-sustaining spirit, the active mind of the 
universe. While w'e cannot know more about God than 
that He is an absolute law, we perceive enough from this 
world of relativity to compel us to recognise an invisible 
spirit. This law is only the expression of a divine mind, 
if we can indulge in a theological phrase. 

The law contradicts theism, only if theism implies 
arbitrary interference and supersession of law and order 
Such action of God is unnatural. Only children and 
savages could believe in an interfering God. To refute 
meaningless interference is not to deny the reality of a 
supreme spirit. For the conception of order, natural and 
moral, does not supersede the final agency of spirit. 
Simply because we cannot comprehend the spiritual source 
and sustaining centre, we need not deny its existence. The 
absoluteness of the moral law which Buddha assumes 
requires a central spirit about which he is silent. Our belief 
that events will continue to happen in accordance with 
the forecasts of reason, and things in the future will not be 
uninterpretable chaos, is grounded in a spiritual view of the 
universe. Even on the most unsympathetic view we have to 
say that Buddha abolished religion of the popular type which 
rests largely on craven fear or worship of power, and 
strengthened religion in the sense of trust in righteousness. 
He held the universe to be a spiritual one, not a mere mechan- 
ism but a dharmakaya, pulsating with life. Dharma is the 
warp and the v;oof of all that lives and moves. Every 
natural cause is the revelation of the spirit at work. Scepti- 



ETHICAL IDEALISM OF BUDDHISM 461 


cism about the spiritual basis of the world is inconsistent with 
disinterested conduct. And Buddha need not be charged with 
such a paradoxical position. 


XIX 

Practical Religion 

The religious instinct of man requires a god, and so in 
the practical religion of Buddha he himself was deified, it 
spite of his own caution. For when Sariputta said to him 
“ Such faith have I, Lord, that methinks there never was 
and never will be either monk or Brahma who is greater 
and wiser than Thou,” he replied : “ Grand and bold are 
the words of thy mouth ; behold thou hast burst forth 
into ecstatic song. Come, hast thou, then, known all the 
Buddhas that were ? ” ” No, Lord.” “ Hast thou 

known all the Buddhas that will be ? ” “ No, Lord.” 

“ But at least thou knowest me, my conduct, my mind, 
my wisdom, my life, my salvation.” “ No, Lord.” ” Thou 
seest that thou knowest not the venerable Buddhas of the 
past and the future ; wiry then are thy words so grand and 
bold ? ” 1 Yet the nature of man is irrepressible. Buddha, 
the eye of the world (lokacaksus), the model we have to 
imitate, he who reveals to us the path to perfection, w r ho 
considers himself to be nothing more than a knov r er who has 
discovered the path and made it possible for others to walk 
in his footsteps, becomes the sole refuge and the only god 
of the masses. 2 

Buddha adopts popular theology which consoles us by 
building up other w'orlds when he admits the reality of 
Brahma and other gods. 3 Only he makes all his gods 
mortal. He denies the first cause of the universe, a creator 
or controller of karma, but acquiesces in popular beliefs 

* Mahaparinibbana Sutta. 

a Cf. : "So also, O Brahmin, of those beings who live in ignorance and 
are shut up and confined as it were in an egg, I have first broken the egg- 
shell of ignorance, and alone in the universe obtained the most exalted 
universal Buddhahood. Thus am I, O Brahmin, the oldest and the noblest 
of beings.” (Oldenberg : Buddha, p. 325.) Buddha is only amargadorsaka, 

1 See Mahagovinda Sutta and Tevijja Sutta. 



462 


INDIAN PHILOSOPHY 


and speaks of intercourse between men and gods. He 
admits spiritual exercises which help us in securing life in 
the lower worlds of form and no form. To secure greater 
prestige for Buddhism, it is even suggested that the gods 
Brahma and Sakka (Indra) are converts to Buddhism. 
They are as much in need of saving knowledge as men. 
All this is in accordance with the Brahmanical tradition, 
where the gods are said to reach the divine status by pious 
deeds, sacrifices and penances. When their reserve of 
punya or merit is exhausted, by their experience of divine 
pleasures, they pass out into other forms. There are 
stories in which the gods struggle for life and power, 
prestige and pre-eminence. When new aspirants for divine 
rank heap up penances and merit which entitle them to 
divinity, the old gods put obstacles in the way. 1 * 3 Buddhism 
adapts the old gods to its new doctrine by making them 
all subordinate to the Buddhist monk aiming at nirvana. 
“ Brahma is overpowered by avidya, Visnu is embraced 
by great illusion which it is difficult to discriminate. 
Sarhkara holds Parvati in his own person, owing to exces- 
sive attachment, but in this world the great muni, the 
Lord, is without avidya, without illusion, and without 
attachment." J 


XX 

Theory of Knowledge 

Taking up next the Buddhist theory of knowledge, we 
find that, unlike the materialist, the Buddhist admits the 
validity of inference in addition to perception, 3 though there 
is a difference between the Buddhist theory of inference 
and the Naiyayika’s. The Buddhist maintains that con- 
nexions could be established between causes and effects, 
while the Naiyayika admits other forms of invariable 


1 The puranic stories of the type of Menaka and Visvamitra illustrate 
this fact. 

» Bhaktiiataka by Ramacandra, 3. 

3 See S.S.S.S., ill. 4. 4. 78-22. Early Buddhism, however, seems to 
have accepted analogy and authority also, ilaitrcya discarded analogy 
and Dignaga discarded authority. Sec J A S. of Bengal, 1903, p. 179. 



ETHICAL IDEALISM OF BUDDHISM 463 


concomitance as well. According to the former, we can 
argue from effects to causes']; according to the latter, not 
only from effects to causes, but also from signs to things 
signified. This distinction is due to the Buddhist doctrine 
of becoming. Though inductive generalisations based on 
inseparability may not be always valid, they are valid with 
regard to causal successions. That all horned animals 
have divided hoofs is an empirical generalisation observed 
to be valid within the limits of experience, though it may 
not be absolutely valid. ( So far as inference to fire from 
smoke is concerned, it cannot be denied, for denying it, it 
is impossible to live.', 

(flow can we esfablish causal relations between two 
phenomena ? The early Buddhist says that if A precedes 
B, and the disappearance of A means the disappearance 
of B, other things remaining the same, then A is the cause 
of B. This is the method of difference. Later Buddhists 
develop this doctrine by emphasising the immediate antece- 
dents of the cause. They also insist that we must be careful 
that no other circumstances are altered. So they state the 
full doctrine of causal inference in five steps, whence it is 
called pancakarani : (x) In the first stage we perceive 

neither the cause nor the effect. (2) The cause appears. 
(3) The effect appears. (4) The cause disappears. (5) And 
the effect disappears. Of course, relations of co-existence 
such as those of genus and species can also be established, 
though in a different manner. If we notice a number of 
instances of the association of a certain character with 
certain others, and if we have never perceived the one 
without the other, we suspect some fundamental identity 
between the two. And if the suspicion is con- 
firmed and identity established, then the generalisation 
follows. If we know an object to be a triangle, we may 
call it a figure, for the generic features must be present in 
the specific. It cannot be a triangle were it not also a 
figure. So among successions the causal ones, and among 
co-existences the genus-species ones, warrant generalisa- 
tions, according to the Buddhists. 

We are not sure that Buddha adhered to these canons of 
truth. The pessimistic view of life, the brlmf in samsara, 



464 INDIAN PHILOSOPHY 

heaven and hell are all taken bodily from the thought 
systems which prevailed in his day. It only shows that 
the most radical account of reality cannot dispense with 
the past history of mind. If we leave aside this part of 
Buddha’s doctrine accepted by him without analysis and 
criticism from previous thought, we feel regarding the rest 
of his philosophy that he was more or less consistent. He 
declines to apply his thought to first causes as well as to 
final causes. He is concerned with actual existence and 
not ultimate reality. To a Brahmin lost in philosophical 
truths about the eternity and the non-eternity of the 
world, Buddha says that he has nothing to do with theories. 
His system is not a dariana, or a philosophy, but a yana, 
or a vehicle, a practical method leading to liberation . 1 
Buddha analyses experience, discerns its true nature. 
Since they adopt the method of analysis, the Buddhists 
are sometimes called analytic thinkers or vibhajyavadins. 
Buddha confines his attention to the world and leaves the 
gods at rest, expecting in return that they will leave him 
at rest. He adopts an attitude of pragmatic agnosticism 
about transcendental iealities. This alone is consistent 
with the facts of experience, the deductions of reason and 
the laws of morality. Nothing is denied, but the back- 
ground is left open for any future reconstruction. We 
must carefully note that this does not mean that Buddha 
is a sceptic who seeks rest in negation. All that he says 
is, let us make ourselves perfect first without quarrelling 
about the goal of perfection. So indifferent was he to 
metaphysical doctrines that among the early followers of 
Buddha we find some who hold to the Brahmanical views. 
The Brahmajala sutta tells us of disciples who speak openly 
against Buddha’s views. Buddha’s sermons are addressed 
to his Brahmin and Buddhist followers together. So 
long as we are of the earth earthly, Buddha asks us to 
give up the attempts to define the indefinable and indulge 
in those "love-affairs of the understanding," the discussions 
of metaph} r sical problems. He would not say anything 
to compel belief or work miracles to persuade the unbe- 
lieving. Inward impulse will lead to the truth, and so his 

* Majjhima Nikaya. 



ETHICAL IDEALISM OF BUDDHISM 4G5 


disciples were exhorted to practise love and charity. Not 
philosophy, but peace alone purifies the soul. When we 
have the deeper illumination born of moral life, we shall 
have the true enlightenment, and why should we try tc 
forestall it with our weak understanding ? 

The striking fact is that Buddha passes over in silence 
all questions of metaphysical import on the ground that 
they are ethically unimportant. What exactly is the 
significance of Buddha’s silence ? Did he know the truth 
and yet refuse to divulge it ? Was he a negative dog- 
matist, denying soul and God ? Or did he consider such 
discussions unprofitable ? Was it his idea that the specu- 
lative tendency was a weakness which ought not to be 
encouraged ? Many of the students of early Buddhism 
consider that B.iddha abolished God and cast off the soul, 
and that it is more definitely atheistic than we have here 
represented it to be. That such a negative interpretation 
is supported by Nagasena, Buddhaghesa as well as the 
Hindu thinkers who criticise the system is well known. 
Nor do we deny that Buddhism became identified very early 
in its career with a negative metaphysic. We submit, how- 
ever, that this negative view is not actually expounded 
by Buddha himself, but is an interpretation of his silence 
on ultimate problems, thought out by his early followers. 
This silence may be indicative of either ignorance of the 
ultimate truth or a deep desire to point a way of salvation 
open to all, whether they are possessed of a metaphysical 
bent or not. The silence of Buddha may be interpreted 
therefore as the expression of an attitude of atheism, or of 
agnosticism, or of a moral earnestness and deep love for 
humanity. In our account of Buddhism, we have frequently 
urged that Buddha’s specific declarations against the denial 
of self, against the confounding of nirvana with annihilation 
and in favour of the reality of an unconditioned to which we 
can escape from the conditional, cannot be easily reconciled 
with a negative philosophy. The fact that Buddha felt 
that he was in the possession of truth and could lead men 
on to it militates against the second view of agnosticism. 
If he did not know the truth, he would not have considered 
himself to be a Buddha or the enlightened. The third 



466 


INDIAN PHILOSOPHY 


hypothesis remains that Buddha knew all about the ultimate 
problems, but did not announce them to the multitudes 
who came to hear him for fear that he might disturb their 
minds. 1 This view seems to us to be the most satisfactory. 
On one occasion Buddha took some dry leaves into the hollow 
of his hand and asked his disciple Ananda to tell him whether 
there were any other leaves besides those in his hand, to 
which Ananda replied : “ The leaves of autumn are falling 
on all sides, and there are more of them than can be num- 
bered.” Then the Buddha said : “ In like manner I have 
given you a handful of truths, but besides these there are 
many thousands of other truths more than can be num- 
bered.” * There are other truths, according to Buddha, 
than those of the phenomenal world which he has revealed. 
If a man is moral, he will see for himself those other truths. 
It is Buddha’s self-imposed mission to insist on the moral 
preparation necessary for the enlightenment of the kind he 
has himself attained. This attitude of Buddha has philoso- 
phical justification. He recognised the limits of human know- 
ledge and drew a boundary line separating the logically know- 
able from the unknowable. He felt that our senses apprehend 
becoming, and things which become are not real. Yet, 
with the Upanisads, he recognises the mystery of the 
infinite. When the finite intelligence takes upon itself the 
infinite task of encasing eternity in time, and immensity 
in space, it is paralysed by paradoxes. We cannot imagine 
the unimaginable. Every attempt to think being, to com- 
prehend reality, turns it into a phenomenon. Reality 
must escape the grasp of the human mind, for man himself is a 
product of avidya. Knowledge with its distinction between 
I and Thou is not final. There is an impenetrable veil 
separating man and the truth. Yet this truth or wisdom, 
which we cannot perceive or know, is not unreal. 

Where does wisdom dwell, Nagasena ? ’ ‘ Nowhere, 0 

king.’ ‘ Then, sir, there is no such thing as wisdom.’ 

' Where does the wind dwell, O king ? ’ ‘Not anywhere, 
sir.’ ‘ So there is no such thing as wind ? ’ ” Buddha 
contends that the reality of the absolute is logically inde- 

1 See B.G., iii. 26. 

* Quoted in Anandacarya’s Brahmadar^anam. p to. 



ETHICAL IDEALISM OF BUDDHISM 467 


monstrable, but never does he assert that it has no existence. 
His opinion may be put in the words of Goethe’s Faust : — 

Who dares to name Him, 

Who to say of Him, I believe ? 

Who is there ever with a heart to dare 
To utter " I believe Him not ” ? 

Buddha does not like the idea of basing the reality of 
Brahman on Vedic authority, for when once we admit the 
evidence of revelation, there is no end to it. So in the 
Tevijja Sutta, Buddha compares those who believe in 
Brahman on the authority of the Vedas and seek union 
with him, to those who build a staircase at the junction 
of four roads to mount up to a high mansion as to which 
they can neither see nor know either where it is, or how it 
is, or what it is built of, or whether it exists at all. It is 
also true that Buddha does not encourage attempts to 
fathom the depths of the unknown . 1 It is a waste of 
valuable time to be discussing things for which our intel- 
lects are inadequate. From the past history of metaphy- 
sical disputes, moreover, Buddha learns that the solid earth 
and moral law begin to rock under our feet when we attempt 
to fly in the attenuated atmosphere of speculation. So he 
asks us to turn back to mother earth and not be taken in 
by the idle flapping of our wings in the vacuum of the 
absolute. Deep interest in metaphysical problems betrays 
to him on the part of the questioners a speculative spirit. 
So it is put down as one of the five heresies . 1 It is the 
ethical obsession of Buddha that is responsible for his 
indefiniteness on metaphysical problems. Unwilling to add 
to the confusion of the times, Buddha asks us to confine 
ourselves to the limits of the comprehensible. 

There seems to be some similarity between Kant and 
Buddha in their attitude to metaphysical problems. Both 
lived in an age when the field of philosophy was divided 
into the opposite camps of metaphysical dogmatism and 
scepticism. Both felt the need for looking deeper into the 

1 Francis Bacon, in the spirit of Buddha, observes that final causes, like 
the vestal virgins dedicated to God, are barren. 

* Cullavagga, ix. i. 4. 



4G8 


INDIAN PHILOSOPHY 


foundations of the dogmatic procedure of reason and were 
anxious to safeguard the validity of ethical principles. 
Both ask us to give up attempts to comprehend logically 
super-sensible realities. To both metaphysics is incapable 
of solving the problems which reason suggests about the 
hidden nature of things. The moment we try to grasp 
them intellectually we shall be lost in antinomies and con- 
tradictions. Both look upon the moral law as the supreme 
guide of life, a law above gods and men, from everlasting 
to everlasting. Doubt (or vieikitsa) of the moral law is 
a grievous sin fatal to salvation. 

As to the tendency to steer clear of ultimate prob- 
lems, we cannot help saying that it was unfortunate. Man 
cannot but philosophise. When Buddha says that what 
is given is conditioned, the question naturally arises, is 
there an unconditioned ? Is that unconditioned only the 
whole of the conditions or an absolute first ? The problems 
whether the world has a beginning, whether the soul is 
immortal, whether man is a free agent, whether there is a 
supreme cause of the world, have a vital relation to the 
highest aspirations of humanity and refuse to be set aside. 
Though it is not open to us to solve them, it is not possible 
for us to desist from raising them. The dignity of man is 
not compromised if he is not able to know the truth of 
things, but yet the same dignity demands that he should 
not be indifferent to it. Buddha tells us that we should 
beware of the temptation of casting a glance into the 
depths, since it is not given to us to fathom the abyss. But 
his dogmatic denunciation of the futility of extra-empirical 
inquiries did not gain its end. 1 The history of Buddhism 


i “ So long as it is thought possible to reach that distant goal of know- 
ledge, so long it is vain for a wise simplicity to protest that we can do very 
well without it. The pleasure of advancing knowledge makes it readily take 
the appearance of a duty, and a deliberate self-restraint of reason seems 
to show, not the simplicity of wisdom, but a stupidity which hinders the 
elevation of our nature. For questions as to the nature of spirit, as to 
freedom and predestination, as to the future state, etc., at once set in motion 
all the powers of the intelligence, and draw men by their importance intc 
a fever of speculation which subtilises and decides, dogmatises and con- 
troverts, with every new semblance of insight It is only when such dis- 
cussions give place to a philosophy which tests its own procedure and takes 
account not only of objects, but also of their relation to the mind of man, 



ETHICAL IDEALISM OF BUDDHISM 469 


points to the inevitability of metaphysics. It is a living 
proof of the truth that we fight against metaphysics only 
to fall into it. 

There is not always a virtue in vagueness, for the inde- 
finiteness of Buddha’s metaphysics enabled his disciples to 
fasten different systems on to what he said. His cautious 
and careful attitude developed into negative systems, and 
his teaching fell a prey to the very dogmatism which he 
was anxious to avoid. In Nagasena, as we have seen, the 
supreme reality becomes a baseless assumption. He repu- 
diates the distinction between the knowable or the pheno- 
menal and the noumenal that is not knowable. Knowledge 
of things is no longer considered to be relative. It is true and 
absolute. There is nothing beyond experience. The real 
and the experienced are identical. The relative is the 
absolute. A true metaphysic must be a theory of experi- 
ence, and not a guesswork as to what is at the back of it 
hiding itself under a veil. We have to accept the fact 
that the world has neither limits in space nor commence- 
ment in time. We must not employ the hypothesis of a 
cause distinct from the world to account for it. Other 
followers of Buddha tried to round off Buddha’s deliver- 
ances on the nature of this world by their own schemes 
of metaphysics. 

XXI 

Buddhism and the Upanisads 

The inquirer who desires to reconstruct remote forms 
of thought has not here the sure key which consecutive 
progress or logical evolution can give him. Buddha, in 
his deep hatred of darkness and love of light, wished to 
abandon all mystery. This procedure favoured clear and 
definite thought, but had its own defects. The teaching of 

that the limits can be drawn closer and the boundary stones laid, which 
will henceforth prevent speculation from passing beyond its proper sphere. 
It needs some philosophy to discover the difficulties that surround many 
conceptions, which are treated by the ordinary consciousness as easy and 
simple. A little more philosophy drives away the illusion of knowledge 
which still remains and persuades us that such objects lie entirely beyond 
the horizon of man’s intelligence.” (Caird : Philosophy of Kant, vol.i.,p. 142.) 



470 INDIAN PHILOSOPHY 

Buddha became deficient in depth and lacking in organic 
character. His ideas stood out in hard outlines broken off 
from each other. The organic inter-connections were not 
clear. The atmosphere which alone could weld together 
the different elements into a spiritual whole was implicitly 
present. Human reason, which is architectonic in its nature, 
must regard its ideas and principles as parts of a possible 
system, and this instinct of the mind requires us to show 
how the teaching of Buddha has a unity of principle under- 
lying it. The only metaphysics that can justify Buddha’s 
ethical discipline is the metaphysics underlying the Upani- 
sads. Buddhism is only a later phase of the general 
movement of thought of which the Upanisads were the 
earlier. “ Many of the doctrines of the Upanisads are no 
doubt pure Buddhism, or rather Buddhism is on many 
points the consistent carrying out of the principle laid 
down in the Upanisads.” 1 Buddha did not look upon 
himself as an innovator, but only a restorer of the ancient 
way, i.e. the way of the Upanisads. Both Buddhism 
and the Upanisads repudiate the authority of the Vedas 
so far as their philosophy is concerned. In practice both 
entered into an alliance with beliefs alien to their spirit, 
so that many who accepted theoretically their teaching 
were practically worshipping other gods. In this matter 
Buddhism was less compromising than the Upanisads. 
Both of them protest against the mechanical theory of 
sacrifices and ritualistic extravagances. Both emphasise that 
there is no release from rebirth either by the performance 
of sacrifice or practice of penance. It is the perception of 
the truth, the knowledge of reality, which is the basis of 
all existence, that will liberate us. The tendency to deny 
the substantial reality of the individual is common to both. 
The feeling that this life is suffering, and the life hereafter 
is that for which we sigh, is accepted by both. They 
exhort us to get rid of life’s fitful fever. The vital teach- 
ing of the Upanisads, the oneness of all life, is accepted 
by Buddha. To both life is one great pilgrimage in which 
we either drop downwards or climb upwards. The tendency 
towards universalism of Buddhist ethics is nothing new. 

* Max Muller : S.B.E., xv. ; Introduction, p. xxxvii. 



ETHICAL IDEALISM OF BUDDHISM 471 


That the absolute reality is incomprehensible by intellect 
is admitted by both. The descriptions of the absolute as 
neither void nor not void nor both nor neither remind us 
of many passages of the Upanisads. If there is nothing 
real, and if it is ordained that we should be eternally ignorant, 
we will not have the insatiable curiosity that devours us. 
In the explanations of soul, world and other problems we come 
across the Upanisad phrases of namarupa, karmavipaka, 
avidya, upadana, arhat, Sramana, Buddha, nirvana, prakrti, 
Atman, nivrti, etc. Buddhism helped to democratise the 
philosophy of the Upanisads, which was till then confined 
to a select few. This process demanded that the deep 
philosophical truths which cannot be made clear to the 
masses of men should for practical purposes be ignored. 
It was Buddha’s mission to accept the idealism of the 
Upanisads at its best, and make it available for the daily 
needs of mankind . 1 Historical Buddhism means the spread 
of the Upanisad doctrines among the peoples. It thus 
helped to create a heritage which is living to the present 
day. Such democratic upheavals are common features of 
Hindu history. When the treasures of the great sages 
were the private property of a few, Ramanuja, the great 
Vaisnava teacher, proclaimed the mystic texts to even 
the pariahs. Buddhism, we might say, is a return of 
Brahmanism to its own fundamental principles. Buddha 
is not so much a revolutionist who rode to success on the 
crest of the wave of reaction against the Upanisad theory 
as a reformer whose aim was to remould the prevalent 
theory of the Upanisads by bringing into prominence its 
neglected truths. The central defect of Buddha’s teaching 
is that in his ethical earnestness he took up and magnified 
one-half of the truth and made it look as if it were the 
whole. » His distaste for metaphysics prevented him from 
seeing that the partial truth had a necessary complement 
and rested on principles which carried it beyond its self- 
imposed limits. 


! See Holmes : The Creed of Buddha. 



472 


INDIAN PHILOSOPHY 


XXII 

Buddhism and the Samkhya System 

There are some thinkers who are of opinion that 
Buddhism and Jainism are both based on the Samkhya 
theory. Burnouf thinks that Buddhism is only a carrying 
out of the principles of the Samkhya. According to Weber 
it is not impossible that the Kapila of the Samkhya system 
and Gautama Buddha were one and the same person, and 
in support of this guess he mentions the fact of Buddha’s 
birth in Kapilavastu. It is a common assumption of these 
systems that life is suffering. They both accept the lower 
and the ephemeral gods of Brahmanism, while they are 
silent about the existence of the supreme eternal deity. 
Wilson writes that certain propositions about the eternity 
of matter, the principles of things and final extinction are 
common to Samkhya and Buddhism. According to Jacobi 
and Garbe the Samkhya propositions of duality and the 
enumeration of tattvas are older than Buddhism. It is 
true that the Samkhya theory of creation and the Buddhist 
doctrine have some similarities. 1 The “ four noble truths ” 
of Buddhism correspond to the four truths of Samkhya as 
put in the Samkhyapravacanabhasya : “ (i) That from 
which we deliver ourselves is pain. (2) Deliverance is the 
cessation of pain. (3) The cause of pain is want of dis- 
crimination between prakrti and purusa, which produces 
the continued union. (4) The means of deliverance is dis- 
cerning knowledge.” Kapila rejects sacrifices, prayers and 
ceremonies as much as Buddha. 

The Buddhists admit that Kapila, the sage to whom 
the Samkhya books ascribed the origin of their philosophy, 
lived several generations before Buddha, and that Samkhya 
ideas prevailed at the time of Buddha. In the first suttanta 
of DIghanikaya, where sixty-two different theories of existence 


1 Avidya is parallel to pradhana, samskara to buddhi, vijnana to 
ahatiikara, namarupa to tanmatras, sadayatana to indriyas (see Kern : 
Manual Ot Buddhism, p. 47, footnote 6). The pratyayasahc;ha of the Sfuiikhyas 
and the pratltyasamutpada of the Duddhists closely resemble each other 



ETHICAL IDEALISM OF BUDDHISM 473 


are mentioned, a view similar to the Samkhya is also found. 
“ On what grounds and for what reasons do the recluses and 
the Brahmins, who are believers in the eternity of existence, 
declare that both the soul and the world are eternal,” and 
that " the souls are many also ? ” Buddha must have 
known the beginnings of the system, though not the 
system itself. That the world was evil and salvation was 
isolation from prakrti may have been very suggestive to 
Buddha. The Samkhya conception of psychic process may 
even have been at the bottom of the Buddhist theory of 
skandhas. But there is no question that the Samkhya 
system is a much later growth summing up the work of 
centuries. The Samkhya Sutras (i. 27-47) refute the 
Buddhist tenet of the momentary duration of external 
objects, which succeed each other in a perpetual flux, 
and the doctrine that things exist only in perception, and 
have no objective reality, and there is nothing but £unya. 
The sutras, moreover, presuppose a knowledge of the schools 
of Buddhism and are later than the schools themselves. 


XXIII 

Success of Buddhism 

In a country where Brahmanism had been for more than 
a thousand years the prevalent religion, Buddhism succeeded 
in undermining it, and in about two hundred years came to 
be recognised as the state religion of India. Not even 
such propagandist religions as Islam and Christianity had 
any whei e, in the history of the world, such marvellous 
success. Nor can it be said that Buddha pandered to the 
passions and prejudices of people. He did not ofter any 
cheap relief from the sins of the soul or put up salvation 
to auction. There is no appeal to human selfishness, since 
Buddhism demands a rigorous renunciation of all the 
pleasures men care for. The causes of the success of 
Buddhism as a religion are the three jewels, or triratna, of 
(1) Buddha; (2) the dharma, or the law; and (3) the sangha, 
or the brotherhood. The singular personality and career 



474 INDIAN PHILOSOPHY 

of Buddha, the friend of humanity, the contemner of the 
exalted, the ascetic hero, had a tremendous effect on the 
minds of men. Speaking of the person of the founder, 
Barth writes : “ We must set clearly before us the admirable 
figure . . . that finished model of calm and sweet majesty, 
of infinite tenderness for all that breathes and compassion 
for all that suffers, of perfect moral freedom and exemption 
from every prejudice.” 1 “ He never spake but good and 

wise words. He was the light of the world.” 1 It would 
have been a surprise if his magnanimity and moral eleva- 
tion did not appeal to the imagination of the people. The 
idea of human brotherhood undermined the growing rigours 
of caste. The institution of the sangha and its spirit of 
discipline attracted many. The Buddhist monks, like their 
founder, forsook all to preach the Truth. The elevated 
morality taught by Buddha, that only the pure in heart 
shall attain salvation, sums up the Law and the Prophets. 
Buddha justified the practice of the good even to those 
who did not believe in a personal God. No other inde- 
pendent ethics gives us a more thrilling message of universal 

1 The Religions of India, p. 118. 

1 Even in the Middle Ages Marco Polo heard of Buddha and wrote of 
him : “ Had he been a Christian, he would have been a great saint of our 
Lord Jesus Christ, so holy and pure was the life he led.” “ There is un- 
questionably much in common between the character and teaching of the 
founders of the two religions. Both are represented as infinitely critical 
and infinitely wise. Both desired beyond all things the salvation of man- 
kind Both proclaimed a royal law of love, the love of our neighbour and 
ourselves, the Buddha, indeed, including among the objects of our chanty 
those poor relations of ours which we call the brute creation. Thou shalt 
hurt no living being.’ Both required of their disciples the forsaking of all 
and the following of the master. Both taught the utter vanity of earthly 
good, insisted on self-denial and exhibited compassion as the highest law 
of life. Both inculcated the supreme necessity of purity of thought and 
intention. Both prescribed the non-resistance of evil, the overcoming of 
evil with good. Both had a special tenderness for the young, the poor, 
the suffering, the outcast. In the accounts which have come down to us 
of the lives of both, there are the most remarkable parallelisms ; and what 
is more important and significant, the personality of both must be accounted 
even now the strongest religious forces in the world, drawing the hearts of 
men by a spiritual magnetism through so many ages.” (W S. Lilly : Many 
Mansions, p. 62 ) “ Among heathen precursors of the Truth I feel more 

and more that Sakyamuni is the nearest in character and eflect to Him 
Who is the Way the Truth and the Life." ( Memoirs of Bishop Milman, 
p. 203 ) 



ETHICAL IDEALISM OF BUDDHISM 475 


benevolence. At a time when bloody sacrifices were not 
yet out of fashion, the teaching of mercy to all creation 
had a tremendous effect. His opposition to ceremonialism 
contributed largely to recommend his doctrine to the masses. 
The sublime grandeur of Buddha’s teaching may be gathered 
from the following utterances of his : “ Never in this 

world does hatred cease by hatred — hatred ceases by love.” 
“ Victory breeds hatred, for the conquered is unhappy.” 
” One may conquer a thousand men in battle, but he who 
conquers himself is the greatest victor.” “ Let a man 
overcome anger by kindness, evil by good.” “ Not by 
birth, but by his conduct alone, does a man become a low 
caste or a Brahmin.” “ Hide your good deeds and confess 
before the world the sins you have committed.” “ Who 
would willingly use hard speech to those who have done a 
sinful deed, strewing salt, as it were, upon the wound of 
their fault ? ” No voice like Buddha’s ever thundered into 
our ears the majesty of the good. It is the flaming ideal 
of righteousness that helped Buddhism to succeed as a 
religion. The missionary spirit contributed considerably to 
the spread of the gospel. Buddha bade his disciples : 
“ Go into all lands and preach this gospel. Tell them that 
the poor and the lowly, the rich and the high, are all 
one, and that all castes unite in this religion as do the 
rivers in the sea.” Buddhism succeeded so well because 
it was a religion of love, giving voice to all the inarticulate 
forces which were working against the established order 
and the ceremonial religion, addressing itself to the poor, 
the lowly and the disinherited. 

REFERENCES 

Buddhist Suttas, S.B.E., vol. xi. 

The Dhammapada and Sutta Nipata, S.B.E., vol. x. 

The Questions of King Milinda, S.B.E., vols. xxxv and xxxvi. 

Warren : Buddhism in Translations. 

Rhys Davids : Buddhism. 

Rhys Davids : Buddhist India. 

Rhys Davids : The Dialogues of Buddha. 

Mrs. Rhys Davids : Buddhism. 

Mrs. Rhys Davids : Buddhist Psychology. 

16 


VOL. X 



476 INDIAN PHILOSOPHY 

Mrs. Rhys Davids and Aung : Anuruddha’s Compendium of 
Philosophy. 

Mrs. Rhys Davids and Maung Tin : The Expositor. 

Poussin : The Way to Nirvana. 

Kern : Manual of Indian Buddhism. 

Hopkins : The Religions of India, chap. xiii. 

Holmes : The Creed of Buddha. 

Coomaraswamy : Buddha and the Gospel 01 Buddhism, 



CHAPTER VIII 


EPIC PHILOSOPHY 


The readjustment of Brahmanism — The epics — The Mahabharata — 
Date — Its importance — The Ramayana — The religious ferment — The 
common philosophical ideas — Durga worship — Pasupata system — 
Vasudeva - Krspa cult — Vaisnavism — Paiicaratra religion — The 
suspected influence of Christianity — The cosmology of the Maha- 
bharata — The Sariikliya ideas in the Mahabharata — Gunas — 
Psychology — Ethics — Bhakti — Karma — Future life — Later Upanisads 
— The isvetasvatara Upanisad — The Code of Mauu— Date — Cosmology 
and ethics. 


I 

The Readjustment of Brahmanism 

While systems of revolt were agitating the eastern part of 
the country, in the west, the home of the Brahmins, great 
changes were taking place, though unconsciously. When 
new communities professing strange beliefs were being freshly 
taken into the Aryan fold, the old Vedic culture had to 
undergo a transformation agreeable to the new hordes who 
were actually swamping the country, or fail to aryanise 
them. It had either to expand and remodel its own religion, 
to accommodate new beliefs, or die and disappear. The pride 
of the Aryan would not allow him to throw open the right 
of sacrifices to the new-comers ; but they could not be left 
uncared for. Since the assimilation of the new beliefs 
was the one condition of continued existence, Aryan culture 
undertook, not without trouble and repugnance, the gigantic 
task of taking in the new beliefs and adapting itself to the 
moral needs of the new-comers The aryanisation was 
essentially a spiritual process. The Brahmin tried to 
allegorise the myth and symbol, the fable and legend, in 
which the new tribes delighted. He accepted the worship 
of the tribal gods, and attempted to reconcile them 
all with Vedic culture. Some of the later Upani- 

4VT 



478 INDIAN PHILOSOPHY 

sads describe the attempts to build a Vedic religion 
on non-Aryan sj'mbolism. The Pasupata, the BhSgavata 
and the Tantrik developments, belong to this period of social 
upheaval through which the aryanisation of vast multitudes 
in pre-Buddhistic India proceeded. They were so moulded 
and developed under Aryan influence that it is to-day 
difficult to maintain that they had not their origin in the 
early Upanisads and the Vedas. The epics of the Ramayana 
and the Mahabharata speak to us of this growth of the Vedic 
religion during the period of the Aryan expansion in India. 

II 

The Mahabharata 

The Mahabharata describes the great war waged in ancient 
times between the two branches of the one royal family, 
that of the Bharatas. It is mentioned in the fsatapatha 
Brahmana 1 that “the greatness of the Bharatas neither the 
men before nor the men after them have ever attained to.” 
The epic relates the heroic deeds of valour which were 
performed in the great w r ar fought about the thirteenth 
or the twelfth century b.c. according to R. C. Dutt and 
Pratt. 2 Colebrooke puts it in the fourteenth century b.c., 
and Wilson, Elphinstone and Wilford are of the same view. 
Macdonell writes: "There can be little doubt that the original 
kernel of the epic has, as a historical background, an ancient 
conflict between the two neighbouring tribes of the Kurus 
and the Pancalas, who finally coalesced into a single 
people. In the Yajur Veda these two tribes already appear 
united, and in the Kathaka king Dhrtarastra Vaicitravirya, 
one of the chief figures of the Mahabharata, is mentioned 
as a well-known person. Hence the historical germ of the 
great epic is to be traced to a very early period, which cannot 
well be later than the tenth century b.c. ”3 The original 
event seems to be a- non-Aryan one, if we may judge from the 
bloodthirst of Bhima, the polyandry of Draupadi and such 
other incidents. But it was soon converted into an Aryan 

> xiii. 5. 4. ’ Dutt: Ancient Hindu Civilisation- 

1 Sanskrit Literature, pp. *84-285. 



EPIC PHILOSOPHY 


479 


story. It has become a national epic, with tales from different 
parts of the country worked into a single whole. It appeals 
to all whether in Bengal or South India, in the Punjab 
or the Dcccan. It was the aim of the Mahabharata to satisfy 
the popular mind, and it could do so only by accepting 
the popular stories. It conserves in a collected form all 
the ancient beliefs and traditions of the race. It is so 
comprehensive in its scope that there is a popular saying 
that what is not in the Mahabharata is not to be found in 
the land of the Bharatas. By bringing together the social 
and the religious ideas of the different peoples assembled 
on the soil of India, it tried to impress on the minds of 
men the fundamental unity of the Bharatavarsa. Sister 
Nivedita writes : “The foreign reader, taking it up as sympa- 
thetic reader only and not as scholar, is at once struck by 
two features : in the first place, its unity in complexity ; 
and in the second, its constant effort to impress on its hearers 
the idea of a single centralised India, with an heroic tradition 
of her own as formative and uniting impulse.” 

Ill 

Date and Authorship 

It is now agreed that the present Mahabharata is an 
enlarged edition of an earlier tradition called the Bharata. 
According to the opening chapter of the Mahabharata, 
the Bharata Sarhhita as originally composed by Vyasa, 
contained 24,000 verses, though Vyasa enlarged it into a work 
of 6,000,000 verses, of which only a lakh now exist. But 
even this Bharata must have been based on lays, ballads 
and versified traditions of the events of the war. Ballads 
and songs recording the doughty deeds of great heroes, 
singing the praises of great warriors, the beauty of queens, 
the pomp of court, could have been composed only when 
the echoes of the war were in men’s ears. From the earliest 
times in the west of India, in the land of the Kuru-Pancalas, 
and in the east, in the land of the Kosalas, the local 
bards were singing the heroic deeds of their tribal heroes. 
These songs could never have been fixed, since they 



480 INDIAN PHILOSOPHY 

were orally transmitted, and should have undergone 
modification in each age. Brahmanism had to reckon 
with these traditions, thoughts and aspirations which were 
not its own. The Bharata is the first attempt at effecting 
a reconciliation between the culture of the Aryans and the 
mass of fact and fiction, history and mythology which it 
encountered. Being nearer the war, it must have been 
a simple heroic poem, with not much of didactic purpose 
or philosophical synthesis. It might have been composed 
about iioo b.c. or so. 1 Soon new material accumulated, 
and the task of assimilation became wellnigh impossible. 
Yet it was attempted, and the Mahabharata is the result. 
It bears on its face the unsatisfactory alliance between the 
folksongs and the superstition of the new communities 
and the religious spirit of the Aryans. Vyasa 1 made the 
best of a bad bargain and wove into a colossal poem the 
floating mass of epic tradition, hero worship, stirring scenes 
of strife and warfare, dressing up the new gods of uncertain 
origin and doubtful morality in the “ cast-off clothes ” 
of the Vedic deities. It is clear that while the ballad stage 
is the first, the Bharata is the next. It must have been 
composed even when the religion was ritualistic and poly- 
theistic. Those portions of the Mahabharata which inculcate 
the worship of the Vedic gods, Indra and Agni, are the relics of 
this stage. Women in those days possessed great freedom and 
caste was not rigorous. There was no element of sectar- 
ianism, no philosophy of the Atman or theory of the 
avataras. Krsna appears as a historical character. The next 
stage of thought represents the period when the Greeks 
(Yavanas), the Parthians (Pahlavas) and the Scythians 
(Sakas) entered the country. We have now the trimurti 
conception that Brahma, Visnu and Siva are different 
forms of the One Supreme, fulfilling the different functions 
of creation, preservation and destruction. The deeds of 
might originally attributed to Indra are now transferred to 
Visnu and in some cases to Siva. What was originally a 
heroic poem becomes a Brahmanical work, and is transformed 

« Mr. Vaidya fixes the date of the earlier work at about 3100 b.c. 

* It is very doubtful whether any one individual can be credited with the 
authorship of the work. 



EPIC PHILOSOPHY 481 

into a theistic treatise in which Visnu or Siva is elevated 
to the rank of the Supreme. The Bhagavadgita, perhaps, 
belongs to this stage, though as a rule the philosophical 
portions of the Mahabharata should be assigned to the 
last stage. In Books XII and XIII we have discussions on 
philosophy, religion, politics and law. When Brahmanism 
ceased to be the religion of a few, by assimilating the indigenous 
beliefs and religious practices of its surroundings, a philosophic 
restatement of the ancient wisdom became necessary. Many 
efforts to combine the absolutism of the Upanisads with 
the theistic beliefs of the people in a synthetic whole were 
made, though not with any genuine principle of reconciliation. 
The author of the Bhagavadgita, with true speculative 
insight and synthetic power, initiates a new philosophical 
and religious synthesis, which forms the background of the 
theistic systems of a later day. Containing within itself 
productions of different dates and authorship, the Maha- 
bharata has become a miscellaneous encyclopedia of history 
and mythology, politics, law, theology and philosophy . 1 

1 We do not know exactly when the Mahabharata was composed. We 
may be pretty certain that about the time of the rise of Buddhism the 
Mahabharata was known. Macdonell is of opinion that “ the original form 
of the epic came into being about the fifth century B.c." This view is 
confirmed by the absence of any reference to Gautama Buddha in the epic. 
Panini is familiar with the characters of the story (Gaviyudhibhyam sthirah, 
8. 3- 95; Vasudevarjunabhyam vun, 4. 3. 98). The Asvalayana Sutras 
mention the work called Mahabharata in addition to the Bharata (Grhya 
Sutras, 3. 4. 4). We have an inscription of the Gupta kings, from which the 
existence of the Mahabharata in that period is evident. The poet Bhasa takts 
many of his plots from the Mahabharata. Asvaghosa refers to the Bharata 
in his Buddliacarita and Saundarananda. Baudhayana in his Dharma Surras 
quotes a verse found in the Yayati upakhyana and another verse found 
in the Bhagavadgita (2. 2. 26 ; 2. 22. 9), and he is said to belong to 400 b.c. 
From all these evidences it may be inferred that the Mahabharata was well 
established about the time of Buddha. We cannot, however, decide with 
any accuracy the particular periods of history represented by its component 
parts Even after the fifth century B.c. we cannot say that it was not 
added to or altered in parts by later writers who wished to harmonise its 
teachings with their own advanced notions of religion and morality. There 
are some who think that parts of the poem are as late as the Puranas, and 
that it was growing till the sixth century a.d "It has been conclusively 
shown that the poem was recognised in a.d 300, and by a.d. 500 was essen- 
tially the same as it now exists ” (Biihler and Kirste : Contribution to tht 
Study of the Mahabharata). In spite of it all, it is not wrong to say that 
the bulk of the work has remained the same from 500 B.c. up till the 
present day. 



482 INDIAN PHILOSOPHY 

The Mahabharata is sometimes called the fifth Veda. 
It is looked upon as a work of authority on conduct and 
society. 1 It is intended to teach even the weak and the 
lowly the rules of ethical conduct. 2 The Buddhist scriptures 
were thrown open to all, while the sacred books of the 
Brahmins were confined to the three higher classes. Hence 
the necessity for a fifth Veda open to all. 

IV 

The Ramayana 

The Ramayana of Valmiki is essentially an epic work, 
and is not of the miscellaneous character of the Mahabharata. 
Its hero Rama, the model of virtue, the pattern of perfec- 
tion, is made the incarnation of Visnu, who took form on 
earth for the repression of wrong and the inculcation of 
virtue. What was originally an epic poem is transformed 
into a Vaisnava treatise. It is not so universal in its 
scope as the Mahabharata. It has the finish and the system 
indicative of no complex authorship. We may, however, 
distinguish two stages in it, the earlier epic phase and the 
later religious adaptation. If we take Books II-VI of the 
Ramayana and leave out of consideration Books I and VII, 
which are admitted to be later additions, we shall see that 
the main substance of the poem is secular. Rama is only 
a good and great man, a high-souled hero, who utilised the 
services of the aboriginal tribes in civilising the south, and not 
an avatar of Visnu. The religion it reflects is frankly poly- 
theistic and external. We have the Vedic gods with Indra as 
their chief. The new divinities of Kama, Kubera, Kartikeya, 
Ganga, Laksmi and Uma, the wives of Visnu and 5iva, 
deified animals like Sesa the snake, Hanumat the monkey, 
Jamba vat the bear, Garuda the eagle, Jatayu the vulture, 
and Nandi the bull, receive prominent mention. Sacrifice 
is the mode of worship. Though Visnu and Siva maintain 

1 Asvalayana Grhya Sutras, 3. 4. 4. 

1 Sayana in his commentary on the Black Yajur-Veda says that the 
Mahabharata and the Puranas are designed to teach the law of duty to women 
and the Sudras, who were not allowed to read the Vedas (see Bibliotheca 
Indica, vol. i.. p. 2). 



EPIC PHILOSOPHY 


483 


their pre-eminence, worship of snakes, trees and rivers 
is also to be met with. Ideas of karma and rebirth are in 
the air. There are, however, no sects. In the second stage 
we have references to the Greeks, the Parthians and the 
Scythians. There is an attempt to make Rama an avatar 
of Visnu. 

For purposes of philosophy and religion, the Ramayana 
is not so important as the Mahabharata, though it reflects 
more truly the customs and beliefs of the times. It is 
sometimes looked upon as a protest against Buddhistic 
monasticism, since it glorifies the domestic virtues and makes 
out that there is no need to give up home life for the sake 
of freedom. 

Since the Ramayana refers to Buddha as a nastika , 1 or 
a denying spirit, its composition is said to be of a later date 
than that of the Mahabharata, though its story may be 
of an earlier period. 

The interesting portions for a student of Indian philosophy 
in the Mahabharata are the Sanatsujatiya, the Bhagavadgita, 
the Moksadharma and the Anugita. When Arjuna asked 
Krsna at the end of the war to repeat what he had told 
him at the commencement, Krsna said that he could 
not command the state of the yoga in which he uttered the 
Gita, and so gave a substitute for it in what is called the Anu 
Gita. Apart from the attempt of the Bhagavadgita to 
reconcile different views, we have in the Mahabharata only 
a collection of different beliefs, a syncretism, but not a 
system. The Anugita points to the existence of a large 
number of philosophical schools. “ We observe the various 
forms of piety to be as it were contradictory. Some say 
piety remains after the body is destroyed ; some say that 
it is not so. Some say everything is doubtful, and others 
that there is no doubt at all. Some say the permanent 
principle is impermanent, others that it exists, still others 
that it exists and does not exist. Some say it is single, 
others that it is twofold, and others that it is both. Some 
Brahmins who know Brahman and perceive the truth 
believe that it is one ; others that it is distinct ; and others 
again, that it is manifold. Some say that both time and 

1 Ayodhya Kaijd^- 

16 * 


VOL. I 



484 


INDIAN PHILOSOPHY 


space exist, others that it is not so.” 1 Conflicting ideas 
are collected together in one whole. We come across the 
polytheism of the Vedas, the monism of the Upanisads, 
the dualism of the Samkhya, the deism of the Yoga, the 
monotheism of the Bhagavatas, the Pasupatas and the Saktas. 
Postponing to the next section a detailed consideration of 
the different religious views, we may here refer to the mass 
of philosophical ideas which were held as the common pro- 
perty of the thinkers of the Mahabharata. 

V 

Common Ideas of the Age 

Since there are different philosophical tendencies in 
the Mahabharata, we cannot say definitely what canons 
of authority it accepts. Generally the Vedic scriptures are 
considered to be valid. Pratyaksa, or perception, anumana, 
or inference, and agarna, or authority, are recognised. 
Sometimes the four canons of the Nyaya system are 
mentioned.* It certainly opposes those who repudiate the 
authority of the Veda. The nastika creed of the dissenters 3 
is refuted by Panca^ikha, a follower of the Samkhya. 4 
The lokayatas are also mentioned. 5 The dialectical pundits 
(hetumantah), who deny the reality of souls and despise 
immortality, “ wander over the whole earth.” 6 A reference 
to the Jains may be found in the passage where a priest 
is said to have “ tramped around Benares, astounding the 
people, clothed in air. . . . like a mad man. ”7 Opposition 
to Buddhism is also found. “ What makes you so glorious ? ” 
asks one woman of another, and the reply is : “I did not 
wear the yellow robe or bark garments, nor go shorn or with 
matted hair.” 8 Heresy and repudiation of the Vedas were 
thought of as landing us in hell and a cycle of low births. 
“ The reason why I was born a jackal,” says a character 
in the Mahabharata, 9 “is that I was a counterfeit pundit, ? 

» Chap. xxiv. * xii. 56. 41. S ii. 31. 70. 

4 Ssantiparva, 218. S i. 70. 46. 6 xii. 19. 23. 

? xiv. 6. 18. 1 xiii. 123. 8; see also xii. 18. 32. 

* xii. 180. 47-48. 



EPIC PHILOSOPHY 


485 


rationalist and critic of the Vedas, being devoted to logic and 
the useless science of reasoning, a proclaimer of logical argu- 
ments, a talker in assemblies, a reviler and opposer of priests 
in arguments about Brahman, an unbeliever, a doubter of 
all, who thought myself a pundit.” The Puranas and the 
Itihasas are also accepted. 1 Here and there there is doubt 
of the value of the Vedic authority. “ Deceitful is the 
Veda .” 3 The Upanisad view, that for those who had 
abandoned routine the Vedas are useless, is perhaps reflected 
here. 

The religion accepted by the Mahabharata is the Vedic 
one, though it carries its past into a greater future. Pre- 
serving its identity, it attempts to do justice to the new 
gods. Indra has grown very weak. Visnu, the solar deity, 
has his attributes embodied in Agni and Surya. Yama retains 
his greatness, though he becomes a judge, a dharmaraja. 
“ Yama is not death as some think. He is one that gives 
bliss to the good and woe to the bad.” 3 Vayu and Varuna 
remain shorn of their prestige. Prajapati is left untouched, 
and for some time, prior to the rise of Siva and Visnu, 
was the highest deity. The early Pali literature of Buddhism 
reflects this stage. The second stage is marked by the 
conception of the trimurti. Brahma, Visnu and Siva 
were regarded as different aspects of the supreme, though 
co-ordinate in rank. Megasthenes was familiar with this 
idea. Visnu and Siva became supreme over other gods, 
though they had not then acquired any clear-cut distinctness. 
They very easily melted into each other. 4 A hymn is 
addressed to Siva having the form of Visnu and Visnu 
having the form of Siva.5 The third stage arises when 
Krsna the epic hero is identified with Visnu. The cult 
of Krsna supersedes both animistic superstitions and 
Vedic ritualism. The dance of Krsna on the head of 
Kallya means the suppression of the -worship of nagas or 
serpents by that of Krsna. The defeat of Indra by Krsna 
symbolises the suppression of Vedic orthodoxy by the Visnu 
cult. 

The henotheistic tendency is still prevalent. “ I am 

1 xii. 343. 20. 1 x i. 329. 6. 

♦ lii. 189. 5. 5 iii. 39. 76. 


» v. 42. 6. 



486 


INDIAN PHILOSOPHY 


Narayana, I am creator and destroyer, I am Visnu, I am 
Brahma, I am Indra the master god, I am king Kubera, 
Yama, &va, Soma, Kasyapa and also Prajapati.” 1 Upani- 
sad monism asserts its rights and reduces the different 
gods into manifestations of the one supreme Brahman. 
Divine immanence is freely taught. The Brahman of the 
Upanisads becomes invested with a distinct personality, 
and is called Isvara, who appears under different names, 
Siva, Visnu, Krsna. 2 Bhakti, or intense love of God, 
which is not motived by any desire, is the essential feature 
of the Mahabharata religion. The un-individualised 
Brahman cannot serve as an object of worship ; the theistic 
religion of the Mahabharata therefore transforms the Brahman 
into an Isvara. It is aware, however, that the impersonal 
absolute is the more real of the two. 3 It is superior to the 
manifested Vasudeva. “ That is real which is indestructible 
and eternal and unmodifiable.”4 The emphasis, however, 
is on the personal Vasudeva, and from the religious point 
of view there is support for it in the Upanisads 5 

The Mahabharata is able to accept different popular 
beliefs on account of its vaguely felt conviction that they 
are all different ways of approaching the one truth. “ In 
all the five systems of knowledge, the same Narayana is 
preached and worshipped according to different methods 
and ideas ; ignorant persons do not know him in this way.” 
We see in the epics the gradual modification of the old 
Vedic religion into modern Hinduism. The Sakta, the 
Pasupata or the f5aiva and the Pancaratra systems, which 
belong to the agama class, and are therefore non-Vedic, 
enter into the Hindu religion. We have also image worship 
in temples, pilgrimages to sacred places gradually introduced. 
Since a knowledge of the different systems of religions 
we meet with in the Mahabharata is essential for under- 
standing the attempts made in the scholastic period to 
interpret the Brahma Sutras, let us deal briefly with them. 

* iii. 189. 5. 

» Patanjah speaks of $iva Bhagavatas; see Mahabhasya, ii. 76. 

S Santiparva, 339. 21-28. 4 Ibid., 162. 10. 

5 See Katha, i. 2. 20 ; Svet. iii. 20 ; vi. 21 ; Mundaka, iii. 2. 3. 



EPIC PHILOSOPHY 


487 


VI 

Durga Worship 

Durga worship is mentioned in the Mahabharata at 
the beginning of the Bhisma parva. Krsna advises 
Arjuna to make an obeisance to Durga before the com- 
mencement of the battle and pray for success. 1 In the 
first stage she is only a virgin goddess worshipped by the 
wild tribes of the Vindhyas. She soon becomes the wife of 
Siva, and is addressed as Uma. In the Markandeyapurana 
and two hymns of the Hari-vamsa, 2 3 she becomes the centre 
of a great cult. Early in the seventh century Bana wrote 
his Candi Sat aka. 

Sakti worship, there is no doubt, prevailed originally 
among the non-Aryans, and was gradually adopted by the 
Aryans. Since she was a fierce goddess looked upon as con- 
trolling the destructive forces of the world, she is made the 
wife of Rudra. Attempts are made to affiliate her with the 
goddesses of the Rg-Veda, RudranI, Bhavanl, etc. Devisukta,3 
which is interpreted as in honour of the primal energy of life, 
is made the basis of Saktaism. The sixth verse of it reads : 
“ I bend the bow for Rudra, to cut off the evil doing hater 
of the Brahman. I fight for man. I pervade heaven and 
earth.” She is the energy drawing forth from Paramatman 
the whole universe from akasa downwards. “ I wander 
like the wind bringing forth all things.” 4 In the Kena 
Upanisad we have Devi bringing the devas, who grew 
arrogant by their victory over the asuras, to their senses 
and finally appearing before Indra in the form of a beautiful 
woman, Uma Haimavati, to offer him supreme knowledge. 

1 Chap, xxiii. Many names are given to her, such as Kumarl (maiden), 

Kali (black or time as destroyer), Kapali (the wearer of skulls), Mahakall 
(the great destroyer), Candi (the fierce), Kantaravasini (the dweller in the 
forest). There is a hymn in the Virataparva (chap, vi) sung by Yudhisthira 
in praise of Durga. She is referred to as the slayer of Mahisa, a goddess 
dwelling in the Vindhya mountains delighting in wine, flesh and animal 
sacrifices. She is also looked upon as Krsna's sister, dark blue in colour 
like him. 

3 Chaps, lix and clxvi ; see also Avalon : Hymns to the Goddess. 

3 R.V., x. 125. « x. 13. 8. 



488 


INDIAN PHILOSOPHY 


She later becomes the mayasakti of Brahman. A philo- 
sophical explanation is offered that the supreme spirit 
cannot perform the three functions of creating, preserving 
and destroying without the help of its energy. When 
Isvara creates, he is dominated by the energy known as 
Vak, or speech, when he preserves, by that of Sri or LaksmI ; 
when he destroys, by that of Durga. Sakti is the Isvari, 
the source, support and end of all existence and life. In 
spite of attempts to aryanise the Sakti cult, the limitations 
of its origin are visible in the practices of some Saktas even 
to-day. 


VII 

The PaSupata System 

In the Mahabharata we find a theology named Pasupata 
centring round the god Siva. 1 The Rudra of the Rg-Veda 
(i. 1 14. 8), the personification of the destructive powers of 
nature, becomes in the Satarudrfya, the lord of cattle, pasu- 
nam patih. In the Brahmanas, Siva becomes the distinctive 
term for Rudra. The Pasupata system continues the tradi- 
tion of Rudra-Siva. 

We have an account of the Pasupata system in Sarvadar- 
sanasaihgraha 2 and Advaitananda’s Brahmavidyabharana. 
Samkara 3 criticises the theology in his commentary on the 
Vedanta Sutras. The five chief categories are the following : 
(1) Kaiana, or cause. The cause is the Lord, the pati, the 
eternal ruler, who creates, maintains and destroys the whole 
existence. (2) Karya, or effect. It is what is dependent 
on the cause. It includes knowledge or vidya, organs or 
kala, and individual souls, or pasu. All knowledge and 
existence, the five elements and the five qualities, the five 
senses and the five organs of action, and the three internal 

■ It is mentioned as one of the five schools of religious doctrine in the 
Narayaniya section (Sfintiparva, 349. 5. 64). In the Vanaparva, Arjuna 
obtains the weapon from Pasupati, the lord of cattle, who is looked upon 
as dwelling in the Himalayas with his wife Uma, Parvatl or Durga, attended 
by a number of beings called ganas, or hosts. He is associated with the 
Rudra of the Rg-Veda who had his hosts of Maruts called ganas, and as 
their leader is styled Gapapati 

• Chap. vi. 1 S.B., ii. a. 37-39. 



EPIC PHILOSOPHY 


489 


organs of intelligence, egoism and mind are dependent on 
the Lord. (3) Yoga, or discipline. It is the mental process 
by which the individual soul gains God. (4) Vidhi, or rules. 
It relates to the practices that make for righteousness. 
(5) Duhkhanta, or the end of misery. It is final deliverance 
or destruction of misery, and obtaining an elevation of 
spirit, with full powers of knowledge and action. The 
individual soul even in the ultimate condition has its own 
individuality, and can assume a variety of shapes and do 
anything instantly. Prasastapada, the early commentator 
on the Vaisesika Sutras, and Uddyotakara. the author of 
the gloss on the Nyaya Bhasya, were followers of this 
creed. 


VIII 

Vasudeva-ICksna 

We now pass to the most important religious doctrine 
of the Mahabharata, the Vasudeva-Krsna cult, which is 
the basis of the Bhagavadglta as well as of modern Vaisna- 
vism. Garbe traces four different stages in the growth of 
the Bhagavata religion. In the first stage it had an existence 
independent of Brahmanism. The central features of this 
stage, which in the opinion of Garbe continued till 300 B.c., 
are the founding of a popular monotheism by Krsna- 
Vasudeva, its alliance with Samkhya-Yoga, the deification 
of the founder of the religion and a deepened religious senti- 
ment on the basis of bliakti. The anti-Vedic character 
of this religion, which is criticised by the commentators of 
the Vedanta Sutras, belongs to this stage. The brahminising 
of the religion, the identification of Krsna with Visnu, 
and the pre-eminence of Visnu, as not merely a great god 
but as the greatest of them all, belong to the second period, 
which is about 300 b.c. The word Vaisnava as the name 
of the sect of Visnu worshippers occurs in the Mahabharata. 1 
In the Vedic worship of Visnu there is no reference to grace. 
The third stage is the transformation of the Bhagavata 
religion into Vaisnavism and the incorporation of the 
elements of the philosophical schools of the Vedanta, the 

1 xviii. 6. 97. 



490 


INDIAN PHILOSOPHY 


Samkhya and the Yoga. This process took place according 
to Garbe from the Christian era up till a.d. 1200. Then 
comes the last stage of philosophic systematisation attempted 
by the great theologian Ramanuja. We are here concerned 
with the first two stages. 

The Bhagavata religion with Vasudeva as the central 
figure, taught to Narada by the Lord in the Svetadvipa, 
is said to be the same as the doctrine of the Harigita 1 and 
that of the Bhagavadgita. 2 

In the Narayanlya section of the Mahabharata is found 
the story of Narada’s visit to Badarikasrama to see Nara 
and Narayana. Finding there Narayana performing some 
religious rites, Narada with a perplexed mind asked whether 
there was anything the supreme Lord had himself to 
worship. Narayana answered that he worshipped the eternal 
spirit, his original substance. Eager to see it, Narada goes 
to Svetadvlpa, where the great Being tells him that he 
is not to be seen by one who is not absolutely devoted to 
him. The religion of Vasudeva is explained to Narada. 
Vasudeva is the supreme soul, the internal ruler of all. 
Living beings are represented by Samkarsana, who is a form 
of Vasudeva. From Samkarsana springs Pradyumna or 
mind, and from Pradyumna Aniruddha or self-consciousness 
arises. These four are forms of the Supreme. The 


1 Santiparva, 346. 

1 34 §- 53 - It I s a monotheistic or ekantika religion. The names Nara- 
yaniya, Satvata, Ekantika, Bhagavata and Pancaratra are used as equiva- 
lents The chief sources for this school are the Narayanlya section of the 
Mahabharata, the Sandilya Sutras, the Bhagavata Purana, the Pancaratra 
Agamas, and the works of the Alvars and Ramanuja. Naradapancaratra 
mentions as the chief works on the subject Brahmavaivarta Purana, the 
Bhagavata, the Visnu Purana, the Bhagavadgita and the Mahabhraata 
(ii. 7. 28-32 ; iii. 14. 73 ; iv. 3. 154). Ramanuja’s works are not useful 
for our present purpose, since they belong to the twelfth century a.d. 
and make a deliberate attempt to reconcile the Upanisad monism with the 
Bhagavata religion. Even the Bhagavata Purana is not of much value 
since, according to tradition, its author took it up when he felt that he did 
not do justice to the devotional element in the Mahabharata (i. 4 and 5). 
It was at the instance of Narada that he made devotion the central feature 
of the Bhagavata Purana. The Narada Sutras and the £andilya Sutras 
are later than the Mahabharata and the Bhagavata, since the former mentions 
Suka and Vyiisa (N.S., 83), and the latter quotes freely from the Bhaga- 
vadgita (9. 15) Thus our chief source is the Narayanlya section of the 
Mahabharata. 



EPIC PHILOSOPHY 


491 


Mandbh&rata suggests that different views were enter- 
tained about the number and nature of these Vyuhas or 
forms. 1 * 3 4 The Bhagavadgita does not mention them, and 
the Vedanta Sutras criticise the theory on the ground 
of its inconsistency with the accepted view of creation. 
There is also a mention of the avataras, Varaha, Narasimha, 
Vamana, Parasurama, Sari Rama, and “ he who will come 
into existence for the destruction of Kamsa at Mathura.” 
Buddha is not mentioned as an avatara. The story of 
Uparicaravasu related by Bhisma to Yudhisthira knows 
nothing of the theory of vyuhas or forms. 1 From it two 
things are clear : that the Bhagavata religion is a 

monotheism, and its way of salvation is devotion or bhakti. 
Slaughter of animals is avoided. It is because Buddha 
made the same protest against animal sacrifices that he 
is made an avatar of Visnu. The religion inculcates a 
combined pursuit of bhakti and karma.3 It does not 
demand ascetic renunciation. 4 

Vasudeva is the first and prominent name of the 
Bhagavat.5 “ The eternal God, mysterious, beneficent and 
loving, should be known as Vasudeva .” 6 The name occurs 


1 Sariitiparva, 348. 57. 

* Uparicaravasu adopted the religion of the Pancaratra system originally 
promulgated by Citrasikhandins. This system was expounded by the 
Ksis in the presence of the great Lord, who said : “You have composed a 
hundred thousand excellent verses, which contain rules for all the affairs 
of men and are in harmony with the Vedas . . . and lay down precepts about 
the religion of action as well as that of contemplation. This sastra will be 
handed down from person to person until it reaches Brhaspati. From him 
the king Vasu will obtain it, and become my devotee.” King Vasu performs 
a sacrifice of horses in which Brhaspati acts as priest and Ekata, Dvita and 
Trita act as overseers, or sadasya. No animal is killed on the occasion. 
The God appears only to the king and accepts his offering. Brhaspati is 
provoked, and the overseers tell him that the great Lord appears only to 
them who are favoured by His grace. They relate the story of the isvetadvipa, 
where " there are men possessing the lustre of the moon, devotees of the god, 
who possess no senses, do not eat anything, are absorbed in Him who is 
bright like the sun. It is there that we heard the great teaching that the 
supreme God is not to be seen by one who is not devoted to Him." See 
Bhandarkar : Vaisnavism. 

3 Jsantiparva, 334-351. 

4 Compare ; Pravrttilaksuija£ caiva dharmo narayanatmakah. §anti, 
347. 80-81. 

5 See B.G., vii. iq. 


6 Bhlsmaparva, chap, lxvi. 



492 


INDIAN PHILOSOPHY 


in the Bhagavata mantra. 1 It is sometimes said that 
the name Bhagavat indicates that the religion is a develop- 
ment of an old Vedic cult. We read in the Vedas of a deity 
called Bhaga, considered to be the bestower of blessings. 
Bhaga gradually came to mean goodness, and according to 
the rules of Sanskrit grammar, the god possessing goodness 
comes to be known as Bhagavat. The worship of such a 
god constitutes the Bhagavata religion. The Visnu Purana 
says that glory (aisvarya), righteousness (dharma), fame 
(yasas), property (sampat), knowledge (jnana), and renun- 
ciation (vairagya), are called Bhaga, and he who possesses 
them the Bhagavat. 2 Gradually Vasudeva became identi- 
fied with Narayana and Visnu. 

From the beginning Visnu was marked out for a 
great destiny. In the Vedas he is the god of three 
strides. He dwells inscrutable in the bright realm of light, 
“ where even the birds dare not fly.” 3 “ To reach the highest 

place of Visnu ” is the ambition of man in the Upanisads.r 
Even in the Vedas Visnu was entrusted with the work of 
the deliverance of man from distress. 5 In the Satapatha 
Brahmana 6 it is said that “men are Visnus.” He is 

< Om namo bhagavate vasudevaya. 

* vi. 5. 74. Tiie Bhagavata religion is also called the SJtvata 
religion, since Vasudeva is giver that name (Adiparva, 218, 12). The Bhaga- 
vata mentions the Satvatas as worshippers oi the Bhagavat (ix. 9. 49). 
They along with Andhakas and Vrsnis were Yadava tribes (Bhaga- 
vata, 1. 14. 25; 3. 1. 29). Mvgasthenes also alludes to them. The 
aryanisation resulted in the identification of Vasudeva with Narayana 
and later Visnu, We cannot be sure that at the time of the Bhagavadglta 
Visnu stands for the supreme reality. In it he is only an Aditya. In the 
Naruyaniya section of the Mahabharata Vasudeva and Narayana are 
identified. The old Vedic conception of two birds dwelling in a tree, friends 
and associates of each other, might have given rise to the stories of the 
eternal friendship of Nara and Narayana, the individual soul and God. The 
onlooker is Narayana, and the eater of the fruit is Nara. Narayana, the 
eternal soul of the universe, is the resting-place of men (XI. B., xii. 341). Manu 
says that the waters were called Naras, and since the Supreme had them 
for His resting-place he is called Narayana (i. 10 ; see also R.V., x. 82. 5 
and 6) He is the origin of the whole world, the Supreme God represented 
as lymg on the body of a huge serpent in the ocean of milk. Metapho r 
apart. He is the self-conscious Lord of the universe confronted by tbe principle 
of not-self. It is from Him that Narada is supposed to get his monotheistic 
religion 

3 R V., i. i 55 . 5 

5 R.V., 6. 49. 13. 


4 Katha, 1. 3, 9. 
6 v. 2. 5. 2-3. 



EPIC PHILOSOPHY 


493 


the great helper of the gods against the asuras according 
to Aitareya Brahmana. He assumes the form of a dwarf 
to recover the earth for the gods from the asuras. 1 * We 
find the name Narayana for the first time in fsatapatha 
Brahmana, 3 * * though there it is not connected with Visnu . 3 

How does Krsna become associated with Vasudeva- 
Narayana ? In the Mahabharata sometimes he is dis- 
tinguished from them. 4 But soon he becomes identified 
with the Supreme. Megasthenes, the Greek ambassador 
to the court of Candragupta (300 b.c.), mentions the fact 
that Krsna was worshipped then at Mathura. If we try 
to trace the ancestry of Krsna, we find it to be the name 
of a Vedic rsi who composed a hymn . 5 He is said to be 
a descendant of Angiras. 6 * In the Chandogya Upanisad we 
find Krsna, the son of Devaki, as a pupil of rsi Ghora ,7 
an Ahgirasa. It is clear that from the time of the Vedic 
hymns down to the Upanisad period there was a tradition 
about Krsna as a Vedic thinker. But in another passage 
of the Rg-Veda Krsna is spoken of as a non-Aryan chief 
waiting on the banks of Amsumatl with an army of 10,000 
to fight Indra. 8 Sir R. G. Bhandarkar believes that a 
nomadic tribe of cowherds called abhiras were worshippers 

1 fsat. Brah , i. 2. 5. 5 ; Tait. Brah., i. 6. 1. 5. * xii. 3. 4. 1. 

3 In Taittirlya Aranyaka, Narayana appears as " the deity, eternal, 
supreme and lord,” and receives the name of ilari (Tait. Ar., x. 11. 1). In 
the Mahabharata Narayana is called an ancient rsi (see also R.V., 10. 90, 
and M.B., v. 49. 5-20; vii. 200. 57). During the period of the Brahmanas 

Narayaija assumes a cosmic character, and in the Mahabharata he is 

identified with Visnu. Thus in the Bhlsnia parva of the Mahabharata, 
Yasudeva, Narayana and Visnu are used as equivalent terms (chaps. Ixv. 
and lxvi). 

« xii. 334. 18. 1 R-V., viii. 74. 

6 See Kausitaki Brah. xxx. 9; Tanini. iv. 1. 96. t iii- 17. 

* vni 96. 13-15. The later legends relating to ICrna's turning the 
Gopas away from the worship of Indra, and the consequent indignation 
of Indra, which resulted in the pouring of incessant rain, and Krsna ’s feat 
of lifting up the Govardhana hill over the heads of the Gopas to protect 
them from the rain, may all be based on tins incident narrated in the 
Rg-Yeda. In the Atharvasaiirhita Krsna is described as having slain the 
giant Kesi. Buddhistic works also mention Ins name (see Lalitavistara.) 
We have evidence to believe that the worship of Krsna was prevalent 
when Jainism arose, for we find that the whole story of Krsna is reproduced 

witli slight alterations in the life of the 22nd 1 Irthankara Arisjanemi, who 
was a famous Yadava. See S.B.E., vol. xxii., pp. 276-279. 



494 INDIAN PHILOSOPHY 

of a boy-god. 1 They were a non- Aryan tribe with unrefined 
manners. The stories of libertinism relating to the life 
of Krsna may have been derived from these wandering 
tribes. 2 According to Mr. Vaidya, Krsna belongs to the 
Yadava race of Ksatriyas, who came in the second invasion 
of the Aryans, a community still pastoral in its habits, which 
found its habitation on the banks of the Jumna. 3 Other 
indologists, like Weber and Dutt, contend that the Pandavas 
were a non- Aryan people, with the peculiar custom of brothers 
marrying a common wife. In them prevailed the Krsna 
cult, and the writer of the Mahabharata tries to show that 
by their devotion to Krsna they were led to victory. 
The wars and incidents of the Pandavas, a people from 
outside the pale of Brahmanism, was worked up with a 
religious motive into the epic, and they were themselves 
admitted into the Aryan fold under the name of the Bharatas. 
Garbe believes Krsna to have lived about two hundred 
years before Buddha, to have been the son of Vasudeva, to 
have founded a monotheistic and ethical religion, and to have 
been eventually deified and identified with the god Vasudeva, 
whose worship he founded. In the Mahabharata we have 
a combination of all traditions about Krsna that survived 
till then, a non-Aryan hero, a spiritual teacher, and a 
tribal god. 

We see in the Mahabharata the process by which Krsna 
is made into a supreme deity. In some places he is repre- 
sented as worshipping Mahadeva.4 There are contexts 
where his divinity is denied. 5 In Sabhaparva Sisupala 
contests Krsna’s claim to rank as god ; Bhlsma defends 
it : “ Whoever says that Krsna is a mere man is of dull 
intellect (mandadhlh).” From this it is obvious that there 
was strong opposition to the deification of Krsna. He 
is sometimes looked upon as the warrior Lord of Dvaraka. 
Occasionally he becomes a religious preacher of monotheism, 
which has for its object of worship Bhagavat, the adorable. 
Sometimes he is identified with Bhagavat himself. The 
Mahabharata contains several layers of thought super- 


1 Mausalaparva, chap. vii. 

3 Epic India, chap, xviii. 

I Muir: O.S.T., iv. pp. 205 s. 


2 Vaisnavism, etc., pp. 36— 38. 
< See Droijaparva. 



EPIC PHILOSOPHY 495 

imposed one upon another in the course of ages representing 
Krsna in all the grades, from a historical character to an 
avatar of Visnu. 

It is clear that the editors of the Mahabharata felt that 
some popular hero must be made the rallying centre to 
counteract the mighty influence of the heretical sects. The 
figure of Krsna was ready to hand. There were, however, 
certain acts which were not characteristic of a divine being 
associated with his life, such as the Rasa-lila, or the circular 
dance with the Gopis, Jalakrida, or water sport, and vastrapa- 
harana, or carrying away of clothes. These demanded some 
explanation. King Pariksit asked Suka to clear his doubt : 
“ The Lord of the universe was incarnate to establish religion 
and destroy irreligion. Did he, being the revealer, master 
and preserver of religious laws, violate them by committing 
the unholy act of adultery ? ” The answer is : “ The viola- 
tion of religious laws by the gods and the daring acts of the 
glorious do not bring any stains, as fire is not stained by 
feeding on impure substances. But those that are not 
gods should never commit such deeds, even in thought. 
If a man foolishly drinks poison in imitation of Siva, he is 
sure to die. The words of the gods are true, but their acts 
are sometimes true and sometimes not." 1 But the ingenuity 
of the Brahmin will not leave it there. He will allegorise 
and attempt to sanctify the whole life of Krsna and mystify 
the atmosphere. The Gopis symbolise people who found 
God by devotion without learning. The desertion of home 
and husband by milkmaids is a symbol of the soul’s self- 
surrender to the heavenly Bridegroom. Brndavana is 
the heart of man. Radha and the Gopis are entangled 
in the maya of the world. The flute of Krsna is the voice 
of God. To follow him means to sacrifice name and fame, 
cast away dignity and self-respect, and give up home, family 
and all. Those who care for social safety and peace cannot 
respond to the call of the infinite. To love God is to take 
up the cross. The surrender of the soul to the heavenly 
Bridegroom w'ho is common to all and special to each — a 
metaphor not peculiar to India — involves the desertion of 
earthly home and husband. The greatest sacrifice of all 

1 Bhagavata, Book x. 33. 26-29. 



496 INDIAN PHILOSOPHY 

must be made before God can be possessed. We hear 
in Vaisnava poetry the constant refrain, “ I am become a 
harlot for thy sake.” Many a folktale is interpreted in this 
mystic manner, and incidents of doubtful morality are meta- 
morphosed into relations of God and the individual soul. 
Yet with the best will in the world to recast history, to alle- 
gorise facts and invent explanations, we cannot accept the 
life of Krsna as described in the Puranas. These incidents 
together with the story of Krsna’s childhood and Balarama’s 
weakness of drink clearly indicate the non-Aryan origin 
of Krsna. If to-day Krsna is the most popular Indian 
god, it is because the author of the Bhagavadgita makes 
him the spokesman of the highest religion and philosophy. 
When Krsna became a god, his other names, Kesava, 
Janardana, etc., were transferred to Vasudeva, and the stories 
of his being the son of Devaki were assigned to the original 
god, and even to-day we have contradictory descriptions of 
him as a high spiritual soul, with keen philosophical insight, 
and a popular hero not quite knightly in his behaviour. 

The Bhagavata system, with its worship of Vasu- 
deva-Krsna, is also called the Pancaratra religion. We do 
not know the origin of this name. In the Padmatantra 
it is said : “ The five other great Sastras are like darkness 
in the presence of this, therefore it is currently known by 
the term Pancaratra.” 1 The name, perhaps, may be due 
to the fact that the system combines five different doctrines. 
We cannot be sure that we have an account of this religion 
in its purity even in the Narayanlya section of the Maha- 
bharata, for the Vedic adaptation seems to have begun 
even then. The Alvars of South India, the earliest of whom 
may be said to belong to the fifth century A.D., adopt this 
doctrine. The term “ alvar ” means one who is immersed 
in god-love. There are twelve alvars recruited from all 
castes, and their works, which are in Tamil, are called 
Prabandhas, or songs in praise of some form of Visnu, 
full of piety and devotion. These constitute the Vaisnava 
Veda. Ramanuja, the commentator of the Vedanta Sutras, 
belongs to a later period, being the sixth in apostolic succession 

1 i. i. 6g. For a different view of the origin of the name see Schrader: 
Introduction to Vdhcaratra. 



EPIC PHILOSOPHY 


49? 


from Nadamuni, who was initiated into the faith by Nammal- 
var. The Bhagavatas are the direct forerunners of Vais- 
navism in India. The followers of the Pancaratra were 
apparently not allowed originally to adopt the Vedic forms 
of worship. They themselves seem to base their views 
on what are called the Pancaratra Agamas. 1 

The Agamas generally classify the topics of discussion 
under the four heads of — (i) knowledge (jnana), (2) medita- 
tion (yoga), (3) construction and establishment of images 
(kriya), and (4) rites (carya or sarhskaras). The central god 
is Vasudeva- Krsna, with his four vyuhas. The imma- 
nence of god Krsna is insisted on : “ Everything is Krsna 
from Brahma to a reed.” * Visnu, the supreme by means 
of his sakti or energy, which has a double aspect of kriya 
and bhuti, answering to force and matter, effects the creation 
of the world. The relation between Visnu and his energy 
is said to be one of inseparable connexion or inherence, 
like that of substance and attribute. Ramanuja accepts 
from the Pancaratra theory the distinct existence of Brahman, 
the individual souls and the world. The way of sacrifice 
yields to the worship of images in temples. The religion 
becomes more emotional. Bhakti, or devotion, is insisted 
on. A chief feature of modern Vaisnavism derived 
from this system is the doctrine of prapatti, or absolute 
self-surrender. God helps those who without any other 
hope fall at His feet. The question arises, How can a just 
God excuse the sinning souls ? The system elevates Laksmi, 
the consort of God, to the place of the mediator. The strict 
justice of God is tempered by the mercy of Laksmi, who 
knows not what it is to punish. 3 This mediator is of the 
very nature of God, and does the work when called upon by 
the devotee. The favour of Laksmi is a necessary prelude 
to that of God Himself. Even past karmas may be forgiven. 


1 Many of them are referred to in Vedantadesika’s Pancaratraraksa 
This, along with the Agama-pramanya of Vamunacarya of the tenth century 
and the Pancaratra section of the Vedanta Sutras (li. 2. 39-42), are our data 
for the system. The Vaisnavite who looks upon the Agamas as revealed 
by Narayana himself never troubles about fixing a date for them. 

1 Abrahma stambaparyantam sarvam Krsnas caracaram (Narada Pan- 
caratra). 

• Nityam ajnatanigraha. 



498 INDIAN PHILOSOPHY 

Prapatti seems to be the way by which the individual soul 
attains to the supreme spirit, and it is quite as efficacious 
as any other method, Samkhya or Yoga. 1 Among the 
worshippers of Visnu there is no caste. Jabala Brahmana 
says: “The people of the Kirata tribe, of the Hunas . . . 
are purified of their sins by their mere contact with those 
who have their heart knit in Visnu.” The followers of 
this school did not very much care for the varnasrama 
(the caste regulations) as did the Smartas, or those who adhered 
to the Vedic sastras. 

It is a debated question whether the Pancaratra, 
Bhagavata or Satvata religion was in its origin Aryan or 
non-Aryan. Some contend that it was non-Aryan, because 
its worship was non-Vedic. It did not adopt the Vedic 
rites or samskaras and its doctrine of the birth of jlvas 
and minds from Samkarsana was opposed to Vedic theories. 
Yamunacarya in his Agamapramanya notices the several 
objections against the authoritativeness of the Agamas 
and refutes them all. The considerations urged against 
are that their contents are of a different spirit from those 
of the Vedas, that they do not mention rites and ceremonies 
like the Agnihotra Qr the Jyotistoma, that they even 
rebuke the Vedas, and that they are not accepted by the 
twice-born or the Dvijas. On the other hand, they are 
practised by the Satvatas, apparently a non-Aryan tribed 
There is too much of black magic and superstition. 3 The 
system is not counted in the traditional fist of doctrines. 
Even Badarayana, if we accept Sarhkara’s view, does not 
support it. It has its own peculiar system of ceremonies, 
branding, etc. To such objections, Yamunacarya replies 
that the system is related to the Vedas, it is accepted as 
authoritative by Badarayana in the Mahabharata and the 
Bhagavata, and also by such reputed seers like Bhrgu and 
Bharadvaja, that the Bhagavatas are the best of Brahmins, 
and that the name Satvata does not refer to a caste, but 
stands for those who possess the quality of sattva in a pre- 
dominant degree. Ramanuja follows Yamunacarya. The 
very need for defence seems to show that it took some 

» §antiparva, 348. 74. ' Warm, 10. 23. 5. 

1 Kshudravidya pracurata 



EPIC PHILOSOPHY 


499 


time for the system to be accepted as Vedic. Some 
of the essential elements of modern Vaisnavism, such as 
image worship, branding the body, the wearing of the 
urdhvapundra (the vertical mark), are due to the Pancaratra 
religion. 

Under whatever name it be called, there is no doubt 
that the religion is a very old one, perhaps as old as Buddhism 
itself, if not older, but since the Narayaniya section in which 
the religion is described speaks of Narada’s adventures in 
the Svetadvipa, or the white island, where the residents 
were ekantins or monotheists, it is sometimes argued that 
the monotheism is borrowed from Christian sources. Dr. 
Seal says : “ This Narayaniya record, in my opinion, contains 
decisive evidence of an actual journey or voyage undertaken 
by some Indian Vaisnavas to the coasts of Egypt or Asia 
Minor, and makes an attempt in the Indian eclectic fashion 
to include Christ among the avatars or incarnations of 
the supreme spirit Narayana, as Buddha came to be included 
in a later age.” 1 Weber is of the same opinion. 2 3 Lassen 
agrees with it. He thinks it probable that certain Brahmins 
might have learnt to know of Christianity in a land lying 
to the north-west of their mother country, and might have 
brought to India some Christian tenets. He believes, 
however, that this land is Parthia, where “ the tradition 
that the apostle Thomas had preached the gospel is old.” 
But monotheism is not unknown in Vedic literature. The 
Chandogya Upanisad mentions the Ekayana religion as 
one of the sastras learnt by Narada.3 The Bhagavata 
religion does not possess any elements fundamentally foreign 
to Indian religious thought. “ For one who is intimate 
with the intellectual life of ancient India the doctrine of 
bhakti is entirely conceivable as a genuine product of 
India,” 4 according to Garbe. “ No shadow of evidence 
has up to now been brought forward to support the theory 
that the conception of bhakti is derived from Christianity. 
The religious significance contained in the word bhakti 


1 Vaisnavism and Christianity, p. 30. 

1 I. A., 1S74. “ An investigation into the origin of the festival of Krsru 

Janma^taml." 

3 vii. 1. 4. 


Garbe : Philosophy of Ancient India, p. 84, 



500 


INDIAN PHILOSOPHY 


has nothing exclusively about it that is specially Christian. 
Not only have devotion to God and faith in Him developed 
themselves gradually in other monotheistic religions, but 
even beyond the circle of monotheistic ideas the two con- 
ceptions are to be found. And particularly in India we 
possess all the essentials on the strength of which we have 
to regard bhakti as ‘ indigenous ’ fact, as Barth says, 
since monotheistic ideas are to be found prevalent from the 
time of the Rg-Veda onward through almost all the periods 
of the religious history of India, and the powerful longings 
after the divine, peculiar to the Indian soul from yore, 
must have developed such sentiments as divine love and 
divine faith in a popularly conceived monotheism.” The 
Svetadvipa, or the white island, is, according to the cosmology 
of the age, a part of India which is north of Mount Meru. 
Christianity, after all, reached India only in the second or 
the third century a.d. We have evidence to show that 
the monotheistic religion prevailed much earlier. Vasudeva’s 
name occurs in Panini’s grammar. 1 According to Sir R. G. 
Bhandarkar, Panini flourished “ in the beginning of the 
seventh century before the Christian era, if not earlier 
still.” 2 Buddhist and Jaina scriptures refer to the bhakti 
school. 3 M. Senart writes that the word bhaktimdn used 
in Theragatha is borrowed by Buddhism from an earlier 
Indian religion. “ If there had not previously existed a 
religion made up of the doctrines of Yoga, of Visnuite 
legends, of devotion to Visnu-Krsna worshipped under 
the title of Bhagavan, Buddhism would not have come to 
birth at all.” 3 Barth says : 5 " The ancient Bhagavata, 
Satvata or Pancaratra sect, devoted to the worship of 
Narayana and its deified teacher, Krsna Devakiputra, 
dated from a period long anterior to the rise of the 
Jains in the eighth century b.c.” In his comment on 
Panini, Patanjali says that Vasudeva is the name of the 
worshipful, that is God. 6 We have also archaeological 
evidence to prove the priority of the Bhagavata religion 
to the rise of Christianity. The Besnager inscription of 


1 iv. 3. 9S. 

3 Therag.ltha, 370. 

5 I. A., 1894, p. 248. 


* Bombay Gazeteer, vol. i., part ii . . p. 141. 
< Indian Interpreter, 1910, pp. 177—178. 
4 J.R.A.S., iyio, p. jG8. 



EPIC PHILOSOPHY 


501 


the second century B.c . 1 mentions the erection of a flagstaff 
with Garuda’s image in it in honour of Vasudeva by 
Heliodora, the Bhagavata. The Ghosundi inscription speaks 
of the worship of Bhagavat Saiiikarsana and Vasudeva. 
A third inscription of the first century b.c. existing at 
Nanaghat contains an adoration of Saiiikarsana and 
Vasudeva. From all this it is evident that the monotheistic 
religion of India is absolutely independent of any foreign 
influences, and is the natural outcome of the life and thought 
of the period. 


IX 

Epic Cosmology 

In cosmology the Mahabharata accepts the Samkhya 
theory, though not consistently. It makes both purusa 
and prakrti aspects of the one Brahman. The world is 
regarded as a development from Brahman. The self is said 
to send out from itself the gunas, the constituents of nature, 
as a spider emits a web. 2 The same idea of the productive 
activity of Brahman is found in other forms. We have 
also the view that from Brahman was created the god 
Brahma, who sprang forth from a golden egg, which forms 
the body of all creatures. The conception of the cosmic 
egg survives. The Samkhya duality becomes more explicit 
sometimes. Nature is other than the purusa, though 
the latter is conceived as cosmic. Both purusa and prakrti 
are derived from one principle. Prakrti creates under the 
control of purusa,3 or purusa impels to activity the 
creative elements. 4 Elsewhere it is also mentioned that 

all activity rests in prakrti, that purusa never acts, and if 
it considers itself as active it is deluded. 5 The idea is also 
found that though creation and destruction are the work 
of prakrti, still prakrti is only an emanation from purusa, 
into which it resolves itself from time to time. 6 We 
do not think that, except by implication, the maya theory is 


* Epigraphica Indxca, vol. x. 
s xii. 314. 12. 

s xii. 222. 15-16; see also B.G., vi. 37. 


» xii. 285. 40. 

4 xii. 315. 8. 

6 xii. 303. 31 3 . 



502 


INDIAN PHILOSOPHY 


contained in the epic. The evolution of the world is 
described after the Samkhya system in many places in the 
Mahabharata. 1 

There is no doubt that the Samkhya ideas were slowly 
maturing in this period, though they were not formulated 
into a system. The chief features of the Samkhya system 
as found in the Mahabharata may be noted, since most of 
the subsequent thought accepts the psychology and the 
cosmology of the Samkhyas, though not their metaphysics 
and religion. The Samkhya enumeration of the elements 
is accepted by the Mahabharata. 2 3 We have a near 
approach to the classical theory in the Anugita,3 where the 
order of development is given. From the unevolved is 
produced the great Mahat, from it individuation or ahamkara, 
from it the five elements, and from them, on the one hand, the 
qualities of sound, smell, etc., and on the other the five vital 
airs, while from individuation arise the eleven organs of 
sense, the five of perception, the five of action and mind. 
The system of the Samkhya is yet distant, since the purusa 
is counted in some passages as the seventeenth, surrounded 
by the sixteen qualities, and not the twenty-fifth. 

Describing the twenty-five elements in many places, the 
Mahabharata adds a twenty-sixth, called lsvara.4 All 
this shows that it was a period when reflection was very 
busy on the Samkhya problems. 

The Mahabharata assumes the doctrine of the gunas. 
The constituents of prakrti are the three qualities of 

sattva (goodness), rajas (passion), and tamas (darkness). 

They are present throughout all things, though in different 
degrees. Beings are classified into gods, men and beasts 
according as the one or the other quality predominates. 5 
These three are the fetters of the soul. “ They are 

seen mixed up. They are attached to one another and 
likewise follow one another. . . . There is no doubt of 
this, that as long as there is goodness (sattva), so long 


1 See Asvamedhaparva, 35. 20-23, and 47. 12-15. 

1 See Santiparva, 303-308 ; Anuglta, xi. 50. 8 ; xii. 306. 39-40. 

3 14. 40-42. 

« Aantiparva, 308; see also 306. 29; 310. 10. 
f Auugita, 14. 36-38. 



EPIC PHILOSOPHY 503 

darkness (tamas) exists. As long as goodness and darkness 
exist, so long is passion (rajas) said to exist, '□hey 
perform their journey together in union and move about 
collectively.” 1 Nilakantha, commenting on this, observes : 
“ However much sattva may be increased, it is still held 
in check by the tamas, and thus there is the continual 
relation of that which checks and that which is checked 
between the three qualities. They exist together though 
varying in strength.” Tamas is the quality of inertia, 
or in man, the spirit of stupor. It aims at the satisfaction 
of the senses. Its end is pleasure. Its character is 
ignorance. If it is controlled, the man is said to be 
temperate. Rajas is the emotional energy exciting 
desires. It makes man restless and long for success and 
power ; when subdued, it has its gentle side of affection, 
pity, love. It is intermediate between tamas, which leads 
to ignorance and falsehood, and sattva, which develops 
insight into reality. Sattva is the intelligent side of man. 
It promotes stability of character and fosters goodness. 
It alone is competent to guide men aright. Its virtue is 
practical wisdom, its end right performance of duty. No 
man is devoid of these qualities. The three qualities have 
their stronghold relatively in mind, life and body. Tamas, 
or the principle of inertia, is strongest in our material nature 
or physical being, rajas in our vital nature, which works 
against the physical, sattva in our mental nature. Strictly 
speaking, they are present in mixed form in every fibre of 
our psychical make-up. Taking up the volitional side of 
conscious life, the tamas element predominates in our lower 
appetites, with their ceaseless recurrence of wants and satis- 
factions. The rajas element prevails in our desires for 
power and profit, for success and adventure. The element 
of sattva aims at a happy balance or adjustment of self to 
environment and an inner harmony . 1 These three by their 
interaction determine the man’s character and disposition. 
All human souls therefore are grouped into inert, restless 
and good. Among the twice-born classes, the Vaisyas, 

* Anuglta, chap. xxiv. 

* Cf. Plato’s three elements of appetite, spirit, reason, and his three 
classes of society. 



504 INDIAN PHILOSOPHY 

or the traders, represent the lowest ; the Ksatriyas, with 
their competitive ways of thinking and efforts to over- 
reach others, form the intermediate stage ; while the Brahmins 
constitute the highest class. When referred to God, the three 
gunas lead to the conceptions of Visnu, Brahma and £iva. 
The gunas are the essential powers of the divine, which are 
not merely existent in a perfect equilibrium of quietude, but 
also in divine action. The tamas in God is a calm subduing 
all actions, the rajas is His will capable of effective and 
blissful action, and the sattva is the self-existent light of 
the divine being. These three qualities which are every- 
where intertwined account for all activities of nature. The 
world is a play of these modes. The variety of phenomena 
arises through the interaction of the equilibrium, motion 
and inertia. “ The gunas are born in gunas and are dis- 
solved in them.” 1 

The teachers of the Samkhya, Kapila, Asuri and Panca- 
£ikha, 2 are mentioned, though there are differences between 
the Samkhya system and that of Pancasikha.3 

We do not agree with Deussen in his view that epic 
philosophy constitutes the transition between the idealism 
of the Vedanta and the realism of the Samkhya. Both are 
assumed in it. Though the Samkhya had not in the epic 
developed many of its characteristic features, still the 
essentials were all there. The Yoga philosophy is assumed, 
though the technical terms of Patanjali’s system are yet 
absent. 4 

In psychology, the Mahabharata accepts the five senses 
of hearing, touch, sight, taste and smell, answering to the 
five elements of earth, water, fire, air and akaia. The 
contact of sense with object is not enough to produce per- 
ception. The feeling has to be conveyed by the manas, to 
buddhi and then to the soul. “ Seeing cannot take place 
by the eye alone -without the aid of mind.”5 Buddhi is 
the deciding factor, since manas is only a transmitting agent. 6 
As to the nature of the soul, some believed with the Samkhya 
that it was an immovable passive spectator of prakrti, the 

• Santiparva, 305. 23. * Anuglta, xii. 319. 59; xii. 218. 14. 

3 See Keith : Samkhya System, pp. 39-40. ♦ See xii. 237. 6-7. 

5 Santiparva, 311. 17. * Ibid., 251. 11. 



EPIC PHILOSOPHY 


505 


source of action and change, sensation and thought. The 
atomic character of soul is also mentioned with approval. 
In addition to the individual souls, it believed in a supreme 
soul, or Purusottama. The Upanisad theory is of course 
present. The Atman is called Ivsetrajna when bound in 
body, and Paramatman when freed from it and the gunas. 1 
The conception of the lihga sarira, or the subtle body, is also 
to be met with.* 


X 

Ethics 

Ethics as the pursuit of happiness is given an important 
place in the Mahabharata. “ All beings desire pleasure 
and seek to avoid pain.” 3 " What we desire is pleasure 

(sukham), and what we hate is pain (duhkham).”r In this 
world the two are mixed up. 5 But both pleasure and pain 
are anitya, or ephemeral. The goal of human endeavour 
is to gain a state where we can accept pleasure or pain 
with calm and composure. 6 Bharma, or righteousness, is 
the stable condition which gives man perfect satisfaction. 
It helps him to gain salvation as well as peace and happiness 
on earth. 

Though dharma leads to moksa, the two are distinguished 
as the means and the end. In the enumeration of the four 
ends of man (purusarthas) dharma, artha (wealth), kama 
(desire), and moksa, the two are distinguished. The 
rules for gaming salvation constitute the moksa dharma. 
In the narrower sense, dharma means the ethical code as 
distinct from the religious, though it has also the freedom 
of the soul in view. 

Apart from certain general principles, like truth-speaking, 
non-violence, dharma is relative and dependent on the 
conditions of society. It has always a social implication. 
It is the bond which keeps society together. 7 If we do 

1 See Sdiitiparva, 1S7. 24. * See Vanaparva, 296. 16. 

3 Santiparva, 139. 61. ♦ Ibid., 295. 27. 

s Ibid., 190. 14 ; 25. 23 ; Vanaparva, 260. 49. 

4 Santiparva, 25. 16. 

7 “ Dharanad dharmam ity ahur dharmo dharayate prajalj.’ Kama 
paiva, 69. 59. 



506 


INDIAN PHILOSOPHY 


not preserve dharma, there would be social anarchy, and 
wealth and art will not flourish. Dharma develops the 
solidarity of society. 1 It aims at the welfare of all creation. 2 * * * 
“ Whatever is not conductive to social welfare, or what 
ye are likely to be ashamed of doing, never do.” 3 According 
to the Mahabharata, the sum total of duties is contained 
in the maxim, “ Thou shalt not do to others what is dis- 
agreeable to thyself.” 4 The caste duties are ordained on 
account of their instrumental value. “ To support the 
state by force and not shaving one’s head is the duty of 
a Ksatriya.” 5 Of course, the really moral virtues are 
regarded as superior to the caste functions. ” Truth, 
self-control, asceticism, generosity, non-violence, constancy 
in virtue — these are the means of success, not caste nor 
family.” 6 * “ Virtue is better than immortality and life. 
Kingdom, sons, glory, wealth — all this does not equal one- 
sixteenth part of the value of truth. ”7 Though women had no 
right to the Vedic sacrifices, they were allowed to go on 
pilgrimages, read epics and worship God in spirit and under- 
standing. 8 * 

Dharma is not conceived in any hedonistic spirit. It is 
not the mere satisfaction of desires. Accumulation of pleasures 
cannot give us true happiness. “ The desire for happiness 
does not cease by the mere enjoyment of pleasures.”9 What- 
ever we get, we try to get beyond. “ The silkworm dies of 
its wealth.” 10 Nothing finite can satisfy the hunger for the 
infinite. It may be necessary for us to suffer for the sake 
of dharma. True joy entails suffering. 11 Discontent is 
the spur of progress. 12 We should control our minds and 
tame our passions. When we become purified in heart 
and possessed of truth we are not likely to go wrong for fear 


1 Lokasamgraha or samajadharana. * Sarvabhutahitam. 

3 Santiparva, 124. 66; 261. 9; 109. 10. 4 Pandit, 1S71, p. 238. 

s "Danda eva hi rajendra ksatradharmo na mundanam.” Santiparva, 

23. 46. 

6 iii. 181. 42. 7 iii. 34, 22. 

8 iii. 37. 33 ; see also iii. 84. 83. 

9 Na jatu kamah kamanam upabhogena samyati. Adiparva, 75. 49. See 

also Manu, ii. 94. 

10 xii. 330. 29. 11 Vanaparva, 233. 4. 

•• Sabhaparva, 55. xi. Asamtosa £riyo mulam. 



EPIC PHILOSOPHY 


507 


of offending men or avoiding pain. The development of 
this attitude requires discipline of mind and will. In some 
places extreme asceticism is advocated. Since pleasure 
and pain are interdependent, the only way of freeing our- 
selves from them is by the destruction of trsna, or thirst. 1 
Through training we acquire a state incomparably greater 
than the satisfaction of desire or the gaining of Indra’s 
heaven. 2 There does not seem to be any consistent attitude 
towards yoga and asceticism in the Mahabharata. We hear 
of rsis standing on one leg, or devoured by vermin, on 
the other hand those who are easily irritable like Durvasas. 
The idea of tapas is prominent, though we hear sometimes 
of protests against it. “ The red garment, the vow of 
silence, the threefold staff, the water-pot — these only lead 
astray. They do not make for salvation. ”3 Retirement 
from the world is not allowed until the individual fulfils the 
duties of the other stages. A story is related in the Maha- 
bharata which points out how very important it is to live in 
the world before leaving it. An anchorite who had left 
the world before marrying came in his wanderings to a 
terrible place, the pit of hell. There he found his father 
and grandfather and all his ancestors suspended one below 
another on the open mouth of the abyss. The rope which 
prevented them from falling into it was slowly being gnawed 
by a mouse, representing the force of Time. So many well- 
known voices reminded him of accents he heard when a 
child appealing in the words “ save us," “ save us.” The 
only hope of salvation for the long line of ancestors was the 
birth of a son. The anchorite understood the lesson, 
returned home and married. 

If we are to fulfil our duties as members of society, how 
are we to know what our duties are ? The pure and perfect 
are laws unto themselves. The imperfect have to accept 
laws made by others and recognised by society. Acara, 
or custom, is the main rule. 4 The rules will assume the 
form of commands and feel like restraints, since they check 

1 Santiparva, 25. 22 ; 174. 16. 

1 Ibid., 174. 48 ; 177. 49. 

5 xii. 321. 47. 

« Anu£a£anaparva, 104. 157 ; Manu, i. 108. 

17 


VOL. X 



508 


INDIAN PHILOSOPHY 


the superficial tendencies of our nature. 1 If conflicts of 
duties arise we have to follow the example of the great. 
The need of a lovable personality to inspire and influence 
is recognised. “ Logic is not conclusive, the scriptures 
differ, the saying of no rsi is valid, the truth of dharma 
seems to be hidden in secret ; the way of the great is to 
be followed.” 2 * * * The truly great are the atmajnanis, or those 
who possess spiritual knowledge. 

Some general rules are prescribed, such as, avoid extremes. 3 
Even too much of patience is forbidden. 4 Though the 
principles of truth and ahiihsa are recognised as imperative, 
still the Mahabharata contemplates exceptions to them. 5 
The law of truth speaking has no intrinsic value, since truth- 
fulness, which means love of humanity, is the only uncon- 
ditioned end. 6 * Yet knowing the danger of allowing ex- 
ceptions to rules the Mahabharata insists on prayascitta, 
or purification, for those who transgress the law of truth- 
speaking.7 

Sin is recognised and the significance of confession with 
repentance is understood. The true penitent should say, 
“ I will not do so again.” Bhakti, or loving faith in God, 
is regarded as a means of attaining moral purity. In some 
passages it is said that we can gain the highest only by 
wisdom and not karma, however good and meritorious. 
We pass from birth to birth, “ so long as the piety which 
dwells in the practice of concentration of mind for final 
emancipation has not been learnt.” 8 * 

The Mahabharata believes in the force of karma, or the 
fatality of the act. It accepts the Upanisad theory that 
all creatures are bound by karma and are released by wisdom. 9 
Sometimes the karma of the forefathers affects even their 
descendants. 10 Attempts are made to reconcile the law of 

1 See AHmamsa Sutras, i. i. 2; M.B., Santipjrva, 29. 4. 29. 

* Vanaparva, 312. 115. 3 Ati sarvatra varjayet. 

I Vanaparva, 28. 6 and 8. 5 Santiparva, 109. 15-16. 

6 Yad bhutahitam atyantam etat satyam matam mama. Santiparva, 

j-9- 13 ; 287. 16. 

7 viii. 104-109. 8 Anuglta, iii. 23. 

9 “ Karmana badhyate jantun vidyaya tu pramucyate.” Santiparva, 

2(0. 7. 

10 Ibid., 129. See also Manu, iv. 170, and Adiparva, bo. 3. 



EPIC PHILOSOPHY 


509 


karma with the freedom of man. While the general tendency 
of the karma theory is to the effect that there is no room 
for independence by the side of its iron necessity, still there 
are redeeming features. Human effort can modify karma. 
Karma is compared to a fire which we can by our effort 
fan into a flame or extinguish altogether. Different kinds 
of karma are recognised : prarabdha, samcita and agami. 
The karmas that have begun to bear fruit in connection 
with this body from among the stock of impressions of 
actions in the previous human birth are called prarabdha- 
karmas. The other impressions due to the past birth are called 
samcita, or seed-like impressions. Those impressions newly 
received by actions in this life are called agami karmas. The 
two latter can be overcome by real jhana and expiatory 
rites, while the prarabdhakarmas cannot. By the grace 
of God we can destroy the force of samcita and agami. It 
is also admitted that success in any enterprise depends not 
merely on karma, but on the effort of the individual. The 
operation of the law of karma does not, however, limit 
the power of God. The law of karma is an expression of 
the nature of God. Visnu is said to be the embodiment of 
the law, its ground and energy. 1 

On the question of future life we have no clear account 
in the Mahabharata. The way of the gods is distinguished 
from that of the fathers, and a third place of hell is admitted. 
Immortality is not “ living glorious like a king.” 2 It is eternal 
happiness in a heaven where there are no sufferings of hunger 
or thirst, death or old age. It is the final condition of bliss 
to be attained by a true yogin. To the warrior, “ happiness 
in Indra’s heaven ” is promised. The stars were looked 
upon as the souls of the departed sages. Arjuna finds 
them to be great heroes slain in battle. The highest 
goal, however, is declared to be union with God. The 
Samkhya theory that the spirit is freed from empirical 
existence when it realises its distinction from nature is also 
referred to. “ When an embodied self properly perceives 
the self concentrated, then there is no ruler over him, since 
he is the lord of the triple world. He obtains various 
bodies as he pleases ... he attains Brahman.”3 

» M.B., xiii. 149. • -'ii. 71. 17. J Anuglta, 4. 



510 


INDIAN PHILOSOPHY 


XI 

The Svetasvatara Upanisad 

Some of the later Upanisads belong to this period, and 
purport to restate the teaching of the early Upanisads. 
They mark an advance in thought and reflect the growth 
of the mind of the country in the intervening period. They 
attach themselves to some tendency of religion or school 
of philosophy. There are Upanisads which specifically 
teach the Yoga practices or the Samkhya principles or the 
Vedanta system. The Jabala upholds an extreme asceticism 
and asks us to root out all desires. The Maitri Upanisad 
also adopts a pessimistic attitude. 1 It makes a synthesis of 
the Samkhya and the Yoga views. An attempt is made to 
trace the twenty-four tattvas of the Samkhya system to the 
supreme Brahman. The Maitri, the Dhyanabindu, and the 
Yogatattva Upanisads extol the Yoga method. The 
Amrtabindu Upanisad teaches that the jivas are parts of 
Brahman in the sense that limited spaces are parts of one 
universal space. It gives an advaitic interpretation. “ That 
verily is partless Brahman which is beyond all thought, 
unstained. Knowing ‘ that Brahman am I,’ one becomes 
immutable.” The one appears as many on account of 
upadhis, or limitations. “ As one and also as many is He 
seen, like the moon in water.” 2 The Kaivalya Upanisad 
makes sannyasa, or world renunciation, the only path to 
moksa.3 It insists on jnanap and argues the non-dependence 
of the self on objects. “ Whatever in the three states (of 
waking, dreaming and sleeping) is the object of enjoyment, 
the enjoyer and the enjoyment itself, from these distinct 
am I, the witness, the pure intelligence, the ever good. ”5 Some 
other Upanisads insist on contemplation, worship of a per- 
sonal god and symbolic meditation. There are Upanisads 
which make out that Visnu or £iva is the supreme Lord 
of the universe, and insist on the path of devotion. The 
Mahanarayana, the Ramatapanniya, the fsvetasvatara, the 

1 i. 2-4. * 8 and 12. J i. 1. 

< 9 and 10. 5 18. 



EPIC PHILOSOPHY 


511 


Kaivalya and the Atharvasiras Upanisads are examples. 
Most of these are chiefly occupied in reconciling the con- 
flicting tenets of the Samkhya, the Yoga and the Vedanta 
philosophies, and belong to a period posterior to the formula- 
tion of the systems. It may be useful to describe the contents 
of the £vetaivatara Upanisad since we have in it an 
attempt parallel to that of the Bhagavadgita, with this 
difference that 3iva is here the supreme Lord. 

It is a post-Buddhistic Upanisad, since it is familiar 
with the technical terms of the Samkhya and the Yoga 
philosophies. It mentions the name of Kapila, though 
^ariikara believes that the name refers to Hiranyagarbha, 
who is brown or gold coloured. The reference to the she- 
goat of three colours 1 is sometimes taken as an indication 
of the three gunas of the Samkhya philosophy. But Ssamkara 
interprets it as a reference to the three original elements 
of the Upanisads, fire, water and earth. Chapter ii of 
the Upanisad is full of references to the Yoga system. 
The word “linga” is used perhaps in the Nyaya sense. 2 
This Upanisad seems to assume a knowledge of Buddhistic 
speculations such as those of time (kala), nature (svabhava), 
or succession of works (karma), or chance, or elements, or 
purusa. In speaking of the highest reality the Upanisad 
uses such names as Hara, Rudra, Siva. 3 The popular 
god of Brahmanism is given the attributes of Brahman. 

Deussen calls the SvetaSvatara Upanisad “ a monu- 
ment of theism,” for it teaches a personal god, creator, 
judge and preserver of the universe. Hara the Lord rules 
over the individual selves and the world of matter. The 
Upanisad repudiates the theory of naturalism, which makes 
svabhava the cause of the universe. 4 The latter theory 
believes that the universe is produced and sustained by 
the natural and necessary action of substances according 
to their owm properties. On such a view there would be 
no need for a supreme being. 

lhe reality of God cannot be proved by logic. It can 
only be realised by faith and meditation.5 “ When absorbed 

■ iv. 5. 1 vi. 9. 

1 i. io ; iii. 4 and 7; iv. 10 and 12. 

4 vi. 1. J vi. 13 



512 


INDIAN PHILOSOPHY 


in this concentration the yogi sees by the true nature of 
his own self, which manifests like a light the true nature 
of Brahman, which is unborn, eternal, free from all effects 
of nature, he gets released from all bonds.” 1 " He has 
no visible form ; no one sees Him with the eye. Those who 
know Him by the heart and understanding, as seated in 
the heart, become immortal.” 3 He is the master of nature 
and soul, the cause of bondage and release, the eternal of 
all things, the self-born. 3 Divine immanence is also admitted. 
He is the dweller in the heart of man concealed in all beings. 
“ Thou art woman, thou art man, thou art the youth and 
even the maid, thou art the old man trembling on his staff, 
thy face is the universe.”4 

The Upanisad is aware of the reality of the impersonal 
Brahman, of which the three tendencies or developments 
are God, world and self. “ Where there is no darkness, 
there is neither day nor night, neither existence nor non- 
existence, there is the all-blessed even alone. ”5 He is 
called " nirguna,” though theistic interpreters say that 
this word means that the Supreme is devoid of evil qualities. 6 
There is no doubt that the Svetasvatara admits the reality 
of a supreme Brahman above the changing world,? beyond 
space, 8 imperturbable, free from change becoming and 
causality. 9 It is the pure basic consciousness by the light 
of which everything shines, 10 and is described as “ without 
parts, without action, without faults, without ignorance 
or misery.” 11 From this Supreme three unborn elements 
proceed, the all-knowing God, the imperfect self, and the 
world of prakrti, which has in it the materials of enjoyment 
and suffering. 13 These three are not ultimately different. They 
are three aspects of the one Brahman. 3 3 The absolute of the 
Upanisads becomes the highest element, an individual among 
individuals. The personal Lord is the composite Brahman, 
the eternal support of jiva and matter.M All theism has 
this ambiguity about it. The religious needs of human 

i ii. 15. 1 iv. 20. 3 vi. 16 ; vi. 7 ; vi. 13. 

» ai. 11. 14. 16 ; iv. 3. See also Mahanarayana, ii. 7; Kaivalya, 9 and 10. 

5 iv. 18. 6 vi. 11. 7 iii. 14. « iii. 20. 

9 v. 13 ; vi. 5. '• vi. 14. 11 vi. 19. »» i. 9. 

*3 i. 12. Tnvidham brahmam etat. See also i. 7. 

>4 Samyuktam etat. 



EPIC PHILOSOPHY 


513 


consciousness demand that the ultimate principle is to be 
conceived as good, 1 the friend and refuge of all, 2 * * the giver 
of desired objects. 3 Since it is hard to contemplate an im- 
personal Brahman, a personal lord is provided. 4 “ Brahman 

is conscious intelligence, one without parts, without a 
body. For helping the devotee in his practice of devotion, 
symbols and forms have been attributed to Him.” 5 The 
Svetasvatara identifies the two, the personal and the im- 
personal, though it makes the personal the creation of the 
impersonal Brahman, if such an act as creation be allowed. 
In relation to the world and the individuals in it, the absolute 
assumes personality. So long as the individual clings to 
his own individuality, the absolute is an other and so a 
personal god. But when the individual surrenders his 
individuality, the two become one. 

We come across the theory of maya, and God is said to 
be the controller of maya. The Samkhya account is accepted 
with modifications. Prakrti ceases to be an independent 
power, but becomes of the very nature of God. 6 The world 
is created by God’s own power (devatma£akti).7 “ As 
a spider spins its web with threads from its own body, so 
has the one God brought forth the world substance from out 
His own being and covered Himself therewith.” 8 The God 
makes manifold the one. 9 There is, however, no suggestion 
that the world is a delusive appearance. It is admitted 
that it hides from our vision the supreme reality. 10 The 
world is maya, since we do not know how the impersonal 
develops into Isvara, the world and the souls. Mava in the 
sense of divine power is also admitted. Prakrti is called 
maya, since the self-conscious Isvara develops the whole 
world through the force of not-self. Maya in the sense 
of avidya is recognised, since the display of the world hides 
the one spirit in it all. These different significations are 
not irreconcilable, though confusion wall result if we do 
not carefully distinguish them. 

The theory of kalpas is put forth as a compromise between 

1 iii. 5. * iii. 17. 3 iv. 11. « Kaivalya, 14. 

5 Ramatapar.Iya, i. 7. See Kaivalya, iS. 

6 iv. 9-10. 7 i. 3. 8 vi. 10. 

> vi. 12. Ekalj ilipam bahtidha yaij karoti. '• v. 1. 



514 


INDIAN PHILOSOPHY 


the accounts of creation given in the Upanisads and the 
endlessness of samsara. According to the latter, actions of 
each life-history issue in the next life. Each life thus pre- 
supposes an earlier and there cannot be any first life, and 
so there cannot be any creation of the world at a particular 
point. We yet hear of the creation of the world as an event 
recurring periodically from all eternity. The universe 
once created persists through an entire kalpa, or world period, 
after which it returns into the supreme God, only to issue 
again from Him. The cause of this re-issue is that the works 
of the soul still survive and demand a fresh creation or a 
renewed existence for their expiation. The idea of a 
periodical dissolution and recreation of the universe is 
common to the Bhagavadgita, the fsvetasvatara and epic 
thought. 1 “ He dwells in all creatures and burning with 
fury at the end of time, He as lord dashes to pieces all created 
things.” 2 * * * “He is the God who many times spreads forth 
one net after another in space and again draws it in.” 3 
The later Upanisads make much of this idea. “It is 
He who, when the universe is dissolved, remains alone on 
the watch, and it is He who then (again) from the depths of 
space wakens to life the pure spirits.” 4 For the single 
creation of the Upanisads, we get an eternally recurring 
process, a recreation occurring after each dissolution, deter- 
mined by the actions of the souls. 

Being a theistic religion, the Svetasvatara draws a dis- 
tinction between the worshipper and the worshipped, 5 soul 
and God, though it is a distinction of degree. By medi- 
tating on God, by devoting oneself to Him, the ignorance of 
man is dispelled. 6 Bhakti is inculcated and the grace of God 
is said to be the cause of the freedom of man.? But God is not 
capricious and in granting His favours is guided by certain 
principles. The doctrine of prapatti, or self-surrender, is 
suggested. 8 There is an appearance of conflict between 
meditation and worship. “ This absolute Brahman should 

1 B.G., ix. 7 ; see also viii. 17-19. - iii. 2. §vetasvatara Up. 

3 v. 3 ; see also vi. 3-4. 4 Maitrl Up., vi. 17. 

5 iv. 6-7; i. 8. 6 1. 10; iv. 4-6. 

7 iii. 20; see also i. 16. 2. 2. 3. 12. 6. 6 ana 21 . 

1 vi. 18. 



EPIC PHILOSOPHY 


515 


be thought as eternal and as always in one’s own soul, 
for beside Him there is nothing to be known ; knowing 
the individual soul as the enjoyer, the objects of enjoyment, 
and dispenser, all these three even as Brahman, he obtains 
liberation.” 1 

The soul after death has to take one of the three paths : 
that of the gods acquired by knowledge, that of the fathers 
acquired by good karma, and the lower one which evildoers 
traverse. 2 We are released from all bonds when we know 
the Creator.3 Till then, we shall have to assume various 
bodily forms in accordance with the nature of our desires. 
“ In this wheel of Brahma (brahma-cakra), which is the 
support as well as the end of all beings, which is infinite, 
roams about the pilgrim soul when it fancies itself and the 
supreme Ruler different ; it obtains immortality when it 
is uplifted by Him.” 4 

XII 

The Code of Manu 

Before we take up the Bhagavadgita we may refer briefly 
to the Code of Manu, to which a high position is assigned 
among the smrtis. Attempts are made to relate the author 
of this law book with the Manu mentioned in the Vedas . 5 
In the Rg-Veda he is often called the father Manu. 6 He 
is the founder of the social and moral order, who first settled 
the dharma. He is the progenitor of mankind. Though 
he may not be an individual law-giver, the dharmasastra 
ascribed to him is held in great respect. “ A smrti opposed 
to Manu is not approved.”? 

Sir William Jones assigns to the Code of Manu a very 
early date, 1250 B.c. Schlegel holds that its date cannot 
be later than 1000 b.c. Monier Williams puts it at about 
500 b.c. 8 Weber considers the text to be more recent 
than the latest parts of the Mahabharata. The author 
is familiar with Vedic literature, and refers to previous 

1 i. 12. » v. 7. J v. 13. 

4 i. 6. i R.V., viii. 27 

* R.V., i. 80. 16 ; i. 124. 2 ; ii. 33. 13. 

7 See Taittiilya Samhita, ii. 2. 10. 2 ; iii. 1. 9. 4. 

* Indian Wisdom, p. 215. 

17 * 


VOL. I 



516 


INDIAN PHILOSOPHY 


legislators and traditions. Weber, Max Muller and Burnell 
think that the versified edition of the Manavadharmasastra 
is a later rendering of an older treatise in prose. It is said 
to be “ a work belonging to the Manavas, one of the six 
subdivisions of the Maitrayaniya school of the Black 
Yajur-Veda, of which a few adherents still exist in the Bom- 
bay Presidency.” In support of this opinion Burnell quotes 
Whitney. 1 From the nature of its style and language, 
the Code of Manu is assigned to the epic period. Like the 
Mahabharata and the Puranas, this book is of a popular 
character intended for those who cannot get to the fountain 
head. It shows the close relation between law and religion. 
Its main purpose is not philosophy. Medhatithi recognises 
the philosophical portions to be more or less prefatory in 
their character. The philosophical views found in chapters 
i and ii are substantially the same as those of the Puranas. 

As Colebrooke asserts in his essays, we have in Manu the 
Pouranik Sarhkhya mixed up with the Vedanta. 2 The account 
of creation given in Manu has nothing distinctive about it. 3 
It is based on the hymn of creation of the Rg-Veda. The 
ultimate reality is Brahman, which soon manifests a dual- 
ism between the self-existent Hiranyagarbha and darkness. 
“ He desiring to produce beings of many kinds from his 
own body, first with a thought created the waters and placed 
his seed in them. That seed became a golden egg equal 
to the sun in brilliancy ; in that egg he himself was born 
as Brahma, the progenitor of the whole world . . . that 
divine one who resided in the egg divided it into two halves, 
from which he formed heaven and earth, and between them 
the middle sphere, the eight points of the horizon and the 
eternal abode of the waters. . . . Thence he drew forth 
the mind, the self-sense, and then the great principle soul and 
all products affected by the three qualities, and in their 
order the five organs which perceive the objects of sensation.” 
Regarding the ultimate metaphysical position of the book, 
much discussion centres round the statement : " This existed 
in the shape of darkness unperceived, destitute of distinctive 
marks, unattainable by reasoning, unknowable, wholly 

* trurnell : The Ordinances of Manu, Introduction, p. xviii. 

* Miscellaneous Essays, vol. i., p. 249 . 3 i. 5 0. 



EPIC PHILOSOPHY 


517 


immersed as it were in deep sleep.” 1 Darkness (tamah) 
is generally interpreted as mGlaprakpti, the root evol- 
vent of the Samkhya philosophy. “ Tamobhutam ” means 
absorbed in this prakrti. Raghavananda, the Vedantin 
commentator, makes “ tamah ” mean avidya, or ignorance. 
The world is said to be evolved from the darkness through 
the causal efficiency of Hiranyagarbha in the order accepted 
by the Samkhya system. The world is also called the £arira, 
or the body of the Hiranyagarbha, and the souls his creation. 
The explanation of the account of creation varies with the 
opinions of the critics themselves. The doctrine of gunas, 2 
the conception of trimurti,3 and the idea of suksmasarira,4 
or the subtle body, are all to be met with. 

The Code of Manu is essentially a dharmasastra, an ethical 
code. It glorifies custom and convention at a time when 
they were being undermined. The loosening of traditional 
doctrine lightened the hold of dogma and authority. 
Respectability is the reply of common sense to reckless 
romanticism. Manu bases his ordinances on ancient usages 
which prevailed in the Hindu settlements on the banks 
of the Ganges. He admits Vedic sacrifices 5 and regards caste 
as an ordinance of God. 6 He favours asceticism, and yet he 
tells us that we have to surrender only the desires opposed to 
dhaima.7 Along with much that is defective there are some 
flashes of genius and insight. “ To be mothers were women 
created, and to be fathers men.” 8 ‘‘He only is a perfect man 
who consists (of three persons united), his wife, himself and his 
offspring.” The husband is declared to be one with the 
wife.9 Social duties are to be fulfilled first and foremost. 
“ A twice-born man who seeks final liberation, without 
having studied the Vedas, without having begotten, and 
without having offered sacrifices, sinks downwards.” 10 “ The 
tapas of a Brahmin is concentrated study, of the Ksatriya 
protection of the weak, of the Vaisya trade and agriculture, 
of the Sudra service of others.” 11 

1 Asld idaiii tamobhutam aprajnatam alaksanam 

Apratarkyam avijneyam prasuptam iva sarvatah. i. 5 
» xii. 24. 3 i. 10. « xii. 16-17. 5 iii. 7 6 - 6 >■ 3 1 - 

7 iv. 176. s ix. 96. ? ix. 45. '• vi. 37. 

11 See Bhagavan Das : Hindu Social Organisation and The International 
Journal of Ethics, October, 1922, on The Hindu Dharma. 



518 


INDIAN PHILOSOPHY 


Moral conduct is that which has a predominance of the 
quality of sattva and that which does not make for 
future existence. 1 He is the ideal hero who has conquered 
all. Pain is subjection to other people and pleasure is 
subjection to self. 2 * * “ He who sacrifices to the self alone, 
equally recognising the self in all creative beings and all 
creative beings in the self, becomes self-governing, self- 
luminous.” 3 Morality, however, is relative to the effects 
of our acts on future life. Conduct which has a tendency 
to bring about a good birth is good conduct, while that which 
brings about a bad birth is bad conduct. But both of these 
are inferior to that supreme conduct which enables us to 
reach perfection or cessation from rebirth. 

We cannot say that Manu is an exclusive advocate of 
the established order whose system provides no scope for 
progress. There are according to him four ways of deter- 
mining right and wrong : Veda, smrti, acara and conscience. 
The three former make for social order, but social progress 
is guaranteed by the last. We can do what is agreeable 
to our conscience (atmanah priyam).4 We are allowed 
to do whatever is convincing to our reason. 5 Manu admits 
the value of the inner witness, the voice of God within us, 
the antaratma. 6 


REFERENCES 

Telang : Bhagavadglta, AnugTta, etc., S.B.E., vol. viii. 
Hopkins : The Great Epic of India, chap. iii. 

C. V. Vaidya : Epic India, chap. xvii. 

R. G. Bhandarkar : Vaisnavism, Saivism, etc. 

Hem Chandra Ray Chaudhuri : Early History of the Vaisnava 
Sect. 

Bixhler : The Laws of Manu, S.B.E., vol. xxv. 


1 xii. 89. 

J iv. 1. 160. Sarvam parava£arh duljkham sarvam atmavaSarh sukham. 

J xii. 91 ; see also 118. •, ji, I2 . 

J Manafj putam samicarot, vl. 46, « i v . 161. 



CHAPTER IX 

THE THEISM OF THE BHAGAVADGlTA 


The importance of the Gita in Indian thought — Its universal significance 
— Date — Relation to the Mahabharata — The Vedas — The Upanisads — 
Buddhism — The Bhagavata religion — The Samkhya and the Yoga — 
Indian commentaries on the Gita — The Gita ethics is based on meta- 
physics — The problem of reality — The real in the objective and the 
subjective worlds — Brahman and the world — Purusottama — Intuition 
and thought — Higher and lower prakrti — The avataras — The nature 
of the universe— Maya — Creation — The individual soul — Plurality of 
souls — Rebirth — The ethics of the Gita — Reason, will and emotion — 
Jnana marga— Science and philosophy — Patanjali’s Yoga — The Jfiani 
— Bhakti marga — The personality of God — The religious consciousness 
— Karma marga — The problem of morality — The moral standard — 
Disinterested action — Gurias — The Vedic theory of sacrifices — Caste — 
Is work compatible with moksa ? — The problem of human freedom 
— The integral life of spirit — Ultimate freedom and its character. 


I 

The Bhagavadgita 

The Bhagavadgita which forms part of the Bhisma parva 
of the Mah&bharata is the most popular religious poem of 
Sanskrit literature. It is said to be “ the most beautiful, 
perhaps the only true philosophical song existing in any known 
tongue.” 1 It is a book conveying lessons of philosophy, 
religion and ethics. It is not looked upon as a sruti, or a 
revealed scripture, but is regarded as a smrti, or a tradition. 
Yet if the hold which a work has on the mind of man is any 
clue to its importance, then the Gita is the most influential 
work in Indian thought. Its message of deliverance is simple. 
While only the rich could buy off the gods by their sacrifices. 


* William von Humboldt. 

619 



520 INDIAN PHILOSOPHY 

and only the cultured could pursue the way of knowledge, 
the Gita teaches a method which is within the reach of all, 
that of bhakti, or devotion to God. The poet makes the 
teacher the very God descended into humanity. He is 
supposed to address Arjuna, the representative man, at a 
great crisis in his life. Arjuna comes to the battle-field, 
convinced of therighteousness of his cause and prepared to 
fight the enemy. At the psychological moment he shrinks 
from his duty. His conscience is troubled, his heart is torn 
with anguish and his state of mind, “ like to a little kingdom, 
suffers then the nature of an insurrection.” If to slay is 
to sin, it is a worse sin to slay those to whom we owe love and 
worship. Arjuna typifies the struggling individual who feels 
the burden anti the mystery of the world. He has not yet 
built within himself a strong centre of spirit from which he 
can know not only the unreality of his own desires and passions, 
but also the true status of the world opposing him. The 
despondency of Arjuna is not the passing mood of a 
disappointed man, but is the feeling of a void, a sort of 
deadness felt in the heart, exciting a sense of the unreality 
of things. Arjuna is ready to repudiate his life if necessary. 
He does not, however, know what is right for him to do. 
He is faced by a terrible temptation and passes through an 
intense inward agony. His cry is a simple yet tremendous 
one, significant of the tragedy of man, which all who can see 
beyond the actual drama of the hour can recognise. The 
mood of despair in wdiich Arjuna is found in the first chapter 
of the Gita is what the mystics call the dark night of the soul, 
an essential step in the upward path. The further stages of 
illumination and realisation are found in the course of the 
dialogue. From the second chapter onwards we have a 
philosophical analysis. The essential thing in man is not the 
body or the senses, but the changeless spirit. The mind of 
Arjuna is switched on to a new path. The life of the soul 
is symbolised by the battle-field of Kuruksetra, and the 
Kauravas are the enemies v r ho impede the progress of the 
soul. Arjuna attempts to recapture the kingdom of man 
by resisting the temptations and controlling the passions. 
The path of progress is through suffering and self-abnegation. 
Arjuna tries to evade the rigorous ordeal by subtle arguments 



THE THEISM OF THE BHAGAVADGlTA 521 


and specious excuses. Krsna stands for the voice of 
God, delivering his message in thrilling notes, warning Arjuna 
against dejection of spirit. The opening chapter shows 
great insight into the heart of man, its conflict of motives, 
the force of selfishness and the subtle whisperings of the 
Evil One. As the dialogue proceeds the dramatic element 
disappears. The echoes of the battle-field die away, and we 
have only an interview between God and man. The chariot 
of war becomes the lonely cell of meditation, and a corner of 
the battle-field where the voices of the world are stilled, a fit 
place for thoughts on the supreme. 

The teacher is the favourite god of India, who is at once 
human and divine. He is the god of beauty and love, 
whom his devotees enthrone on the wings of birds, on the 
petals of flowers, on whatever they most delight in of all that 
lives on earth. The poet vividly imagines how an incarnate 
God would speak of Himself. There is support for the poet’s 
device to make Krsna say that he was Brahman. In the 
Vedanta Sutras , 1 the Vedic passage where Indra declares him- 
self to be Brahman is explained on the hypothesis that Indra 
is only referring to the philosophical truth that the Atman 
in man is one with the Supreme Brahman. When Indra 
says “ Worship me,” he means “ worship the God I worship.” 
On a similar principle Vamadeva’s declaration that he 
is Manu and Surya is explained. Besides, the Gita teaches 
that an individual freed from passion and fear and purified 
by the fire of wisdom attains to the state of God. Krsna 
of the Gita stands for the infinite in the finite, the God in 
man concealed within the folds of flesh and the powers of 
sense. 

The message of the Gita is universal in its scope. It 
is the philosophical basis of popular Hinduism. The author 
is a man of deep culture, catholic rather than critical. He does 
not lead a missionary movement ; he addresses no sect, estab- 
lishes no school, but opens the way to all the winds that blow. 
He sympathises with all forms of worship, and is therefore 
well fitted for the task of interpreting the spirit of Hinduism 
which is unwilling to break up culture into compartments 
and treat other forms of thought and practices in a spirit 

1 i. i. 3°- 



522 INDIAN PHILOSOPHY 

of negation. 1 The Gita appeals to us not only by its force 
of thought and majesty of vision, but also by its fervour of 
devotion and sweetness of spiritual emotion. Though the 
Gita did much to develop spiritual worship and undermine 
inhuman practices, still on account of its non-critical attitude 
3t did not destroy altogether false modes of worship. 

The tone of the Gita is dogmatic, and its author does not 
suspect that it is possible for him to err. He gives the 
truth as he sees it, and he seems to see it in its entirety 
and many-sidedness, and to believe in its saving power. 
“ In the Gita there is a sage that speaks in the fullness and 
enthusiasm of his knowledge and of his feelings, and not a 
philosopher brought up in any school who divides his material 
in conformity to a settled method and arrives at the last 
steps of his doctrines through the clue of a set of systematic 
ideas.” 2 The Gita stands midway between a philosophical 
system and a poetic inspiration. We do not have here the 
illimitable suggestiveness of the Upanisads, since it is a 
deliberately intellectual solution of the problem of life. It 
is designed to meet a situation complicated by troubles of 
conscience and confusion of mind. 

The main spirit of the Gita is that of the Upanisads ; 
only there is a greater emphasis on the religious side. The 
thin abstractions of the Upanisads could not satisfy the many- 
sided needs of the soul. The other attempts to solve the 
secret of life were more theistic in their texture. The author 
of the Gita found that men could not be made to love logic. 
So he took his stand on the Upanisads, drew out their 
religious implications, galvanised them into a living system 
by incorporating with them popular mythology and national 
imagination. 

II 

Date 

The question of the date of the Bhagavadglta cannot 
be easily settled. Since it forms a part of the Mahabharata, 
it is sometimes doubted whether it is an interpolation added 

1 B.G., iii. 29. 

1 Indian Antiquary, 1918, p. 3. Garbe’s Introduction to the Bhaga- 
vadglta. 



THE THEISM OF THE BHAGAVADGlTA 523 


to the text at a later period. According to Talboys Wheeler, 
that “ Ivrsna and Arjuna on the morning of the first day of 
the war, when both armies are drawn out in battle array and 
hostilities are about to begin,” should " enter into a long and 
philosophical dialogue respecting the various forms of devotion 
which lead to the emancipation of tho soul,” is unnatural. 
Telang, agreeing partially with this judgment, argues that the 
Bhagavadglta is an independent work appropriated by the 
author of the Mahabharata for his own purposes. 1 Though 
a philosophical discussion may be “ incongruous and irrele- 
vant ” at the beginning of the battle, still there is no doubt 
that only grave crises such as the battle-field stimulate in 
thinking minds thoughts about the ultimate values. Only 
then do spiritually disposed minds acquire the tension 
necessary to break the barricades of sense and touch the 
inner reality. It is possible that Arjuna might have had 
pointed advice from his friend Krsna which the poet worked 
up into the poem of seven hundred verses. The author of 
the Mahabharata is anxious to elaborate the principles of 
dharma whenever he has an opportunity, and he does so in 
the present context. 

There are internal references to the Bhagavadglta in the 
Mahabharata which clearly indicate that from the time of the 
composition of theMahabharata the Gita has been looked upon 
as a genuine part of it. 3 The stylistic resemblances between 
the Gita and the Mahabharata show that they belong to 
one whole.3 In the main views about other systems of 
philosophy and religion, there is also agreement. Karma 
is preferred to akarma.r The attitude to the Vedic sacrifices,5 
the statements of the order of creation, 6 the account of the 
Samkhya theory of gunas,7 and Patanjali's Yoga, 8 and the 
description of Visvarupa,9 are more or less the same. Nor 

1 S.B.E., vol. viii., Introduction, pp. 5-6. 

* Adi Parva, 2. 69 ; i. 179 ; 2. 247. 

3 Tilak: GIta-rahasya, Appendix; S.B.E., vol. viii.. Introduction. 

« B.G., chap, iii ; Vanaparva, chap, xxxii. 

5 Seintiparva, 267 ; see also Manu, chap. iii. 

6 B.G., chaps, vii and viii; Santiparva, 231. 

7 B.G., xiv and xv ; Asvamedhaparva, 36-39; Santiparva, 285 and 300-31 1. 

• B.G., chap, vi ; Santiparva, 239 and 300. 

9 Udyogaparva, 170; Asvamedhaparva, 55; Santiparva, 339; and 
Vfanaparva, 99. 



524 INDIAN PHILOSOPHY 

can we say that the principles of reconciliation are peculiar 
to the Gita. 

Even when we assign the Bhagavadgita to the Mahabha- 
rata as a genuine part of it, we cannot be sure of its date, since 
there are products of different periods included in it. Telang 
in a learned introduction to his Bhagavadgita deals with the 
general character of its teaching, its archaic style, its versifica 
tion and its internal references, and argues that the work 
belongs to a period earlier than the third century B.c. Sir 
R. G. Bhandarkar thinks that the Gita is at least as old as 
the fourth century B.c. Garbe assigns the original Gita to 
200 b.c., and the present form of it to a.d. 200. fSamkara 
(ninth century a.d.) comments on it, and Kalidasa knows it. 
In his Raghuvamsa 1 there is found a passage akin to a Gita 
verse. Bana refers to the Gita, and these two authors belong 
to the fifth and seventh century a.d. The Puranas (second 
century a.d.) contain many Gitas composed after the manner 
of the Bhagavadgita. Bhasa in his Karnabhara has a passage 
which reads like an echo 2 of a verse from the Gita. Bhasa 
is sometimes assigned to the second or the fourth century 
a.d., and sometimes to the second century B.c. Even on 
the former view, the Gita must have been earlier. Bodha- 
y ana’s Grhya Sutras are familiar with Vasudeva worship, 
and contain a statement attributed to the Lord (Bhagavan), 
which seems to be a quotation from the Bhagavadgita .3 This 
is also true of his Pitrmedha Sutras. If Apastamba belongs 
to the third century B.c. ,4 then Bodhayana is earlier by a 
century or two. We shall not, I believe, be far wrong if we 
assign the Gita to the fifth century B.c.5 

III 

Relation to Other Systems 

Almost all the views which prevailed in the age influenced 
the author of the Gita, who brings to a focus the rays of religious 

> 10. 31. Cf. B.G., 3. 22. 

> Hato pi labhate svargam jitva tu Iabhate yasah. Cf. B.G., ii. 37. 

3 2. 22. 9. Cf. B.G., ix. 26. 

< S B.E., vol. ii.. Introduction, p. xliii. Cf. vol. xiv., p. xliii. 

s If the references in the Dhaiim. Sutras are regarded as interpolated 
texts, then the Gita may be assigned to the third or I he second century B c. 



THE THEISM OF THE BHAGAVADGITA 525 


light cast at random in the world about him. It is necessary 
for us to note the exact relations between the Gita on the 
one hand and the Vedas, the Upanisads, Buddhism, the 
Bhagavata religion and the systems of Samkhya and Yoga 
on the other. 

The Gita does not throw overboard the authority of the 
Vedas. It considers the Vedic injunctions to be quite valid 
for men of a particular cultural status. One cannot attain 
perfection, according to the Gita, without obeying the 
ordinances of the Vedas. Sacrificial acts are required to be 
performed without any expectation of reward. 1 After a 
particular stage, the performance of Vedic rites tends to 
become an obstacle to the attainment of supreme perfection. 
The exalted character of the Vedic gods is not accepted. 
Though the Vedic obervances secure for us power and wealth, 
they do not take us straight to freedom. Deliverance can 
be found by the discovery of self. When the secret of salva- 
tion is in our possession there is no need for the performance 
of Vedic karmas. 2 * 4 * 

The philosophic background of the Gita is taken from 
the Upanisads. Some verses are common to the Upanisads 
and the Gita. 3 The discussions of Ksetra and Ksetrajna, 
Ksara and Aksara are based on the Upanisads. The 
account of the supreme reality is also derived from the same 
source. Bhakti is a direct development of the upasana of 
the Upanisads. The love for the supreme involves the giving 
up of all else. “ What shall we do with progeny, when we 
have got this being, this world to live in ? ” 4 Ideas of 
devotion to the supreme, the conquest of self and the attain- 
ment of a condition of peace and serenity are in the atmo- 
sphere of the period. Disinterested work is defended even in 
the Upanisads. 5 That non-attachment results from an 
elevated state of mind is brought out in the Upanisads. 6 
The practical and the religious tendencies of the Upani- 


1 xvii. 12. ! ii. 42-45; ix. 20-21. 

3 B.G., ii. 29, and KathaUp., ii. 7 ; B.G., ii. 20 ; viii. 11, and KathaUp.. 
ii. 19; ii. 15; B.G., iii. 42, and Katha Up., iii. 10; B.G., vi. 11 and Svet, 

Up., ii. 10 ; B.G., vi. 13, and Svet. Up., ii. 8. 

4 Brh. Up., iv. 4. 22. 3 Isa. Up. 

4 Chan. Up., iv. 14. 3 ; Brih., iv. 4, 23. 



526 


INDIAN PHILOSOPHY 


sads are so developed as not to supersede the teachings of 
earlier thinkers. The cold flawless perfection was no doubt 
a magnificent explanation of the world, but it was not quite 
suited to be a transforming power of life. The vogue of 
the Bhagavata religion inclined the author of the Gita to 
give a glow and a penetrating power to the absolute of the 
Upanisads. He made it into a personal Isvara, called by 
the different names of Siva, Visnu, etc. All the same, the 
author is aware that he is only revivifying a dead past and 
not propounding a new theory. “ This imperishable yoga 
I declared to Vivasvat, and he taught it to Manu, Manu 
to Iksvaku,” and this secret is now revealed to Arjuna by 
Krsna . 1 This passage indicates that the message of the 
Gita is the ancient wisdom taught by Vi£vamitra, the 
seer of Gayatri, and the rsi of the third cycle of the Rg-Veda 
and Rama, Krsna, Gautama Buddha, and other teachers of 
the Solar line. The full name of the Gita, as it is evident from 
the colophon at the end of each chapter, is the Upanisad 
of the name of the Bhagavadgita. The traditional account 
of the relation between the Gita and the Upanisads is con- 
tained in the passage now almost too familiar for quotation, 
that " the Upanisads are the cows, Krsna is the milker, Arjuna 
the calf, and the nectar-like Gita is the excellent milk.” 

The Bhagavata religion was the immediate stimulus to 
the synthesis of the Bhagavadgita. It is actually suggested 
that the teaching of the Gita is identical with the doctrine 
of the Bhagavatas. It is sometimes called the Harigitad 
There is no mention of Buddhism, though some of the views 
of the Gita are like those of Buddhism. Both protest against 
the absolute authority of the Vedas and attempt to relax 
the rigours of caste by basing it on a less untenable founda- 
tion. Both are the manifestations of the same spiritual 
upheaval which shook the ritualistic religion, though the Gita 
was the more conservative, and therefore less thorough- 
going protest. Buddha announced the golden mean, though 
his own teaching was not quite true to it. To prefer celibacy 
to marriage, fasting to feasting, is not to practise the golden 
mean. The Gita denounces the religious madness of the 
hermits and the spiritual suicide of saints who prefer darkness 
* iv. 1-3. « isantiparva, 349. 10. 



THE THEISM OF THE BHAGAVADGlTA 527 


to daylight and sorrow to joy. It is possible to attain salva- 
tion without resorting to the cult of narrowness and death. 
The word nirvana occurs in the Gita, 1 but this does not show 
any borrowing from Buddhism, since it is not peculiar to it. 
In the descriptions of the ideal man the Gita and Buddhism 
agree. 2 As a philosophy and religion; the Gita is more 
complete than Buddhism, which emphasises overmuch the 
negative side. The Gita adopts the ethical principles of 
Buddhism, while it by implication condemns the negative 
metaphysics of Buddhism as the root of all unbelief and 
error. It is more in continuity with the past, and therefore 
had a better fortune than Buddhism in India. 

According to Garbe, "the teachings of the Samkhya-Yoga 
constitute almost entirely the foundation of the philosophical 
observations of the Bhagavadgita. In comparison with them 
the Vedanta takes a second place. Samkhya and Yoga are 
often mentioned by name, while the Vedanta appears only 
once (Vedantakrt, xv. 15), and then in the sense of Upani- 
sad or treatise. Accordingly, when we think merely of the 
role which the philosophical systems play in the Gita as it 
has been handed down to us, and when we consider the 
irreconcilable contradictions between the Samkhya- Yoga and 
the Vedanta, which can only be done away with by carefully 
distinguishing between the old and the new, the Vedantic 
constituents of the Bhagavadgita prove not to belong to the 
original poem. Whether we investigate the Gita from the 
religious or the philosophical side, the same result is reached.” 
The terms Samkhya-Yoga when they occur in the Gita do 
not represent the classical schools of Samkhya and Yoga, 
but only the reflective and the meditative methods of gaining 
salvation .3 Besides, during the period of the Gita there was 
no clear-cut distinction between the Samkhya-Yoga on one 
side and the Vedanta on the other, which alone can justify 
Garbe’s interpretation. Fitz-Edward Hall is more correct 

• vi. 15. 

1 ii. 55-72 ; iv. 16-23 • v - 18-28 ; xii. 13-16. Cf. Dhammapada, 360- 
423; Suttanipata, Munisutta, i. 7 and 14. 

3 B.G., ii. 39 ; iii. 3 ; v. 4-5 ; xiii. 24. In xviii. 13 there is a reference 
to the philosophy of Samkhya. Madhva quotes a verse from Vyasa Smrti, 
where Samkhya means knowledge of spirit, atmatattvavij lanam. See his 
Commentary on B.G., ii. 40. 



528 


INDIAN PHILOSOPHY 


when he says : " In the Upanisads, the Bhagavadgita, and 
other ancient Hindu books, we encounter, in combination, the 
doctrines, which after having been subjected to modifications 
that rendered them as wholes irreconcilable, were dis- 
tinguished at an uncertain period into what have for many 
ages been styled the Samkhya and the Vedanta.” 1 The 
psychology and the order of the creation of the Samkhya are 
accepted by the Gita, though the metaphysical implications of 
the Samkhya are rejected by it. 1 Kapila’sname is mentioned, 
though not that of Patanjali. We cannot, however, be sure 
that this Kapila is the founder of the Samkhya system. 
Even if it be so, it does not follow that the system in all its 
details was elaborated by that time. The terms buddhi 
or understanding, ahamkara or self-sense, and manas or mind, 
occur, though not always in their Samkhya significations. 
The same is true of prakrti.3 While the Samkhya deliberately 
avoids the question of the existence of God, the Gita is most 
anxious to establish it. 

Though the distinction between puru§a and prakrti 
is recognised, the dualism is overcome. Purusa is not an 
independent element, but only a prakrti or form of God. 
The psychical intelligence is the higher nature. When we 
deal with the Samkhya system we shall see how it looks upon 
all the modes of prakrti or nature as phenomena implying 
a permanent subject to whom they appear and for whom 
they exist. Though prakrti or nature is unconscious, its 
activities are purposive, meant as they are for the freedom of 
the soul. The teleological character of its activities is not in 
accord with its alleged unconsciousness. In the Gita the 
difficulty is overcome. There is a spiritual fact behind the play 
of prakrti or nature. Purusa or soul is not the independent 
reality which it is in the Samkhya system. Its nature is not 
mere awareness, but bliss also. The Gita does not recognis* 
any ultimate distinctness of individual souls. 4 It also believes 
in the existence of an Uttamapurusa, or supreme soul. 
Yet the character of the individual soul and its relation to 

* Preface to Samkhyasara, p. 7. 

1 ii. 11-16, 1S-30 ; ii. 27-29; v. 14; rii. 4; xiii. 5. 

J lii. 33 ; iv. 6 ; vii. 4 ; ix. 8 ; xi. 51 ; xiii. 20 ; xviii. 59. 

« vii. 4 ; xiii. 20-22 ; see also V.S., 2. 1. 1., and S.B on it. 



THE THEISM OF THE BHAGAVADGITA 529 


nature as given in the Bhagavadgita show the influence of 
the Samkhya theory. 1 Purusa is the spectator, and not the 
actor. Prakrti does everything. He who thinks “ I act ” 
is mistaken. r To realise the separateness of purusa from 
prakrti, soul from nature, is the end of life. The theory of the 
gunas or qualities is accepted. “ There is no entity on earth 
or heaven among the devas that is free from the three qualities 
born of prakrti.” 2 The gunas constitute the triple cord 
of bondage. So long as we are subject to them we have 
to wander in the circuit of existence. Freedom is deliverance 
from the gunas. The physiological account of the internal 
organs and the senses is found here as in the Samkhya.3 
The Gita refers to yoga practices also. When Arjuna asks 
Krsna as to how mind, which is admittedly fickle and 
boisterous, can be brought under control, Krsna answers 
by saying that abhyasa, or practice, and vairagya, or in- 
difference to worldly objects, should be acquired. t 


IV 

The Teaching of the Gita 

At the time of the Gita many different views about ulti- 
mate reality and man’s destiny prevailed. There were the 
Upanisad traditions based on the intuition of the soul, the 
Samkhya doctrine that liberation can be obtained by freeing 
oneself from contact with nature, the Karma Mimamsa view 
that by fulfilling our duties we attain perfection, the way 
of devotional feeling which holds that by attaining exaltation 
of the heart, the gladness of freedom can be obtained, and the 
Yoga system, which declares that man is free when the quiet 
life of the soul takes the place of the vari-coloured light of 
the world. The supreme spirit is viewed either as an 
impersonal absolute or a personal lord. The Gita attempts 
to synthesise the heterogeneous elements and fuse them 
all into a single whole. That is why we find in it apparently 

■ Samkhya KarikS, 6a ; B.G., xiii. 34. 

‘ xviii. 40 ; xiv. 5. ! iii. 40-42 ; xiii. 5. 

4 See B.G., vi. 33-34. ^aihkara sees a reference to the Nyaya system 
in x. 32. Sco S.B.G. on it. 



530 INDIAN PHILOSOPHY 

conflicting views about the end of freedom and the means of 
discipline. Finding that the Gita is not a consistent piece 
of doctrine, different writers try to account for it in different 
ways. Garbe and Hopkins suppose that several writers in 
different centuries have been at work upon it. According 
to Garbe the original Gita was written in the second century 
b.c. as a theistic tract, based on the Samkhya-Yoga, though 
in the second century a.d. it was adapted by the upholders 
of the Upanisad monism. “ These two doctrines — the 
theistic and the pantheistic — are mixed up with each other, 
and follow each other, sometimes quite unconnected and some- 
times loosely connected. And it is not the case that the one 
is represented as a lower exoteric and the other as the higher 
esoteric doctrine. It is nowhere taught that theism is a 
preliminary step to the knowledge of the reality or that it is 
its symbol, and that the pantheism of the Vedanta is the 
ultimate reality itself ; but the two beliefs are treated of 
almost throughout as though there was indeed no difference 
between them, either verbal or real.” 1 Hopkins makes the 
Gita a Krsnaite version of a Visnuite poem, which was 
itself a late Upanisad. Keith believes that it was orignally 
an Upanisad of the type of the Svetasvatara, but was later 
adapted to the cult of Krsna. Holtzmann looks upon it 
as a Visnuite remodelling of a pantheistic poem. Barnett 
thinks that different streams of tradition became confused in 
the mind of the author. Deussen makes it a late product of 
the degeneration of the monistic thought of the Upanisads, 
belonging to a period of transition from theism to realistic 
atheism. 

There is no need to accept any of these conjectures. The 
Gita is an application of the Upanisad ideal to the new situa- 
tions which arose at the time of the Mahabliarata. In adapting 
the idealism of the Upanisads to a theistically minded people, 
it attempts to derive a religion from the Upanisad philosophy. 
It shows that the reflective spiritual idealism of the Upani- 
sads has room for the living warm religion of personal 
devotion. The absolute of the Upanisads is revealed as 
the fulfilment of the reflective and the emotional demands of 
human nature. This change of emphasis from the speculative 
* I.A., December 1918. 



THE THEISM OF THE BHAGAVADG1TA 531 


to the practical, from the philosophical to the religious, is 
also to be found in the later Upanisads, where we have the 
saviour responding to the cry of faith. The Gita attempts 
a spiritual synthesis which could support life and conduct 
on the basis of the Upanisad truth, which it carries into 
the life-blood of the Indian people. 

The question whether the Gita succeeds in gathering up 
the different tendencies of thought into a true whole remains 
to be answered in the course of our study. The Indian 
tradition has always felt that incongruous elements are 
fused together in it, while the Western scholar has per- 
sisted that the brilliant fragments refuse to coalesce even 
in the skilled hands of the author. There is no use of dogma- 
tising in the very premises of the discussion . 1 


1 There are several commentaries on the Gita by Indian writers, of 
which the chief are those by Vrttikara, £arhkara, Ramanuja, Madhva, 
Vallabha, Nimbarka and Jnanesvar. Anandagiri says that the Vrttikara 
Bodhayana, the author of a voluminous commentary on the Vedanta 
Sutras, also wrote a vrtti or gloss on the Gita (see Anandagiri on S.B.G., 
ii. io). According to him the Gita teaches the method of the combined 
pursuit of J liana and Karma. Neither of them by itself leads to freedom. 
Saihkara believes that Juana or wisdom is the highest means to perfection, 
and contends that the identity of the individual soul with the supreme 
Brahman is to be realised by intuitional wisdom. The manyness of the world 
is traced to the imperfection of man. All action is the cause of bondage, since 
it is dependent on the false sense of duality. When true wisdom abolishes our 
ideas of duality, the soul is saved, and no action has any meaning thereafter. 
The other paths of Karma or work, Bhalcti or devotion. Yoga or self-control, 
lead only to wisdom or Jnana. See S.B.G., iii. i. Ramanuja distinguishes 
jlva or cit, world or acit, and God or Isvara, and makes the two former 
constitute the body of God. In metaphysics he adopts thus a modified 
monism, and in practice insists on the path of devotion. He suggests by 
implication that the rules of caste should be maintained throughout. Both 
Samkara and Ramanuja subordinate Karma, though with different motives. 
Madhva repudiates the theory' of maya and accepts an ultimate distinction 
between the absolute Brahman and the individual souls. For him, also, 
devotion to God is the supreme way to bliss. Though Vallabha declares 
that Brahman and the purified soul are one, he yet makes jlva a part of 
Brahman. The world of maya is not false, since maya is only a power 
separated from Isvara by his will. Grace of God is the only way by which 
the individual could be freed. According to Nimbarka the world and the 
souls are dependent on God in whom they exist, though in a subtle con- 
dition. His theory is called dualistic non-dualism. Jnanesvar makes 
Patahjali's yoga the aim of the teaching of the Gita. When there are so 
many views of the Gita adopted by able minds, the task of the student is 
not an easy one. Its bold and brilliant syntheses and reconciliations do 
not always give us exact information as to how contradictory ideas are to 



532 INDIAN PHILOSOPHY 

The context in which the Gita is said to be delivered 
points out how its central purpose is to solve the problem of 
life and stimulate right conduct. It is obviously an ethical 
treatise, a yoga sastra. The Gita was formulated in a period 
of ethical religion and so shared in the feeling of the age. 
Whatever peculiar adaptations the term yoga may have in 
the Gita, it throughout keeps up its practical reference . 1 
Yoga is getting to God, relating oneself to the power that 
rules the universe, touching the absolute. It is yoking not 
merely this or that power of the soul, but all the forces of 
heart, mind and will to God. It is the effort of man to unite 
himself to the deeper principle. We have to change the 
whole poise of the soul into something absolute and un- 
compromising and develop the strength to resist power and 
pleasure. Yoga thus comes to mean the discipline by which 
we can train ourselves to bear the shocks of the world with 
the central being of our soul untouched. It is the method or 
the instrument, upaya, by which the end can be gained. 
Patanjali’s yoga is a system of psychic discipline by which we 
can clear the intellect, free the mind of its illusions and get 
a direct perception of reality. We can discipline the emotions 
and realise the supreme by a soul-surrender to God. We can 
train our will so as to make our whole life one continuous 
divine service. We can also perceive the divine in the nature 
of our being, watch it with ardent love and aspiration, till 
the spark grows into an infinite light. All these are different 
yogas or methods leading to the one supreme yoga or union 
with God. But no ethical message can be sustained if it is 
not backed up by a metaphysical statement. So the yoga 
sastra of the Gita is rooted in brahmavidya, or knowledge of 
the spirit. The Gita is a system of speculation as well as a rule 

be logically combined. There is no denying that the Gita fosters a life of 
spirit. There is a romantic twilight which captures the imagination and 
uplifts our nature, so long as we are religiously minded and rely on dogmatic 
thought. But the critical intellect has to work on it with care before it 
can deduce a consistent system from it. 

‘ Yoga is practice as distinct from Samkhya or knowledge. See Sveta- 
Svatara Upanisad, *' Saiiikhyayogadigamyam,” knowable by knowledge 
and practice. Yoga also means karma, see Gita, iii. 7; v. 1. 2; ix. 28; 
xiii. 24. The yoga of the Lord is spoken of as His wondrous power. See 
ix. 5 ; x. 7 ; xi. 8. Yoga also means getting things which we do not have. 
See ix. 22. 



THE THEISM OF THE BHAGAVADGlTA 533 


of life, an intellectual search for truth as well as an attempt 
to make the truth dynamic in the soul of man. This is 
evident from the colophon at the end of each chapter, which 
has come down to us from a date which is unknown, that it 
is the yoga sastra, or religious discipline of the philosophy 
of Brahman, " brahmavidyanam yogasastre.” 

V 

Ultimate Reality 

The problem of ultimate reality is here approached, as in 
the Upanisads, by the two ways of an analysis of the objective 
and of the subjective. The metaphysical bent of the author 
is clearly revealed in the second chapter, where he gives us 
the principle on which his scheme is based : “ Of the unreal 
there is no being, and of the real there is no non-being.” 1 
The objective analysis proceeds on the basis of a distinction 
between substance and shadow, the immortal and the 
perishable, the aksara and the ksara. “ There are these 
two beings in the world, the destructible ksara and the 
indestructible aksara. The unchanging one is the aksara.” 2 
We cannot say that the “ unchanging one ” here referred to 
is the supreme reality, for in the very next verse the Gita 
declares that “ the supreme being is another called the highest 
self, Paramatman, who as the inexhaustible Lord pervading 
the three worlds supports them.” 3 The author first 
distinguishes the permanent background of the world from 
its transitory manifestations, the prakrti from its changes. 
Within this world of experience, “ imau loke,” we have 
the perishable and the permanent aspects. Though prakrti 
is permanent when compared with the changes of the world, 
still it is not absolutely real, since it depends on the supreme 
Lord. i This supreme spirit is the true immortal, the abode 
of the eternal. 5 Ramanuja, to suit his own special theory, 
makes ksara stand for the principle of prakrti, and aksara 

1 ii. 16. » xv. 16. 3 xv. 17. 

< It is said that " there is another being unmanifested and eternal and 
distinct from this unmanifested principle, which is not destroyed when all 
existences are destroyed ’’ (viii. 20). 



534 INDIAN PHILOSOPHY 

for the individual soul, and regards Purusottama, or the 
supreme self, as superior to both these. It is possible for us 
to interpret the conception of Purusottama as that of the 
concrete personality which is superior to the false abstractions 
of the infinite and the finite. The only difficulty is that 
Brahman, declared to be the basis of the finite, cannot be 
looked upon as a mere abstraction. The Gita distinguishes 
between the finite or the impermanent, and the infinite or 
the permanent. Whatever is limited or transitory is not 
leal. All becoming is an untenable contradiction. That 
which becomes is not being. If it were being, it would 
not become. Since the things of the world are struggling 
to become something else, they are not real. Transitoriness 
marks all things on earth. In the background of our 
consciousness, there is the conviction that there is something 
that does not pass away. For nothing can come out of 
nothing. That ultimate being of reality is not the ever- 
changing prakrti. It is the supreme Brahman. It is the 
eternal or rock-seated being, kutasthasatta, while the world is 
only timeless, endless existence, anadipravdhasatld. “ He 
sees truly who sees the supreme Lord abiding alike in 
all entities and not destroyed though they are destroyed .” 1 
This eternal spirit dwells in all beings, and is therefore not 
a qualitatively distinct other to the finite. The Gita believes 
in the reality of an infinite being underlying and animating 
all finite existences. 

The individual self is ever unsatisfied with itself and is 
struggling always to become something else. In its conscious- 
ness of limitation, there is a sense of the infinite. The finite 
self which is limited, which ever tries to rise beyond its sad 
plight, is not ultimately real. The true self has the character 
of imperishableness. The Gita tries to find out the element 
of permanence in the self, that which is always the subject and 
never the object. Ksetra is the place or the object, and 
Ksetrajna is the knower of the object or the subject . 2 
What is known is not a property of the knower. In the self 
of man, there is the element of the knower that remains 
constant behind all changes. It is the eternal, immutable, 
timeless self-existence. Breaking up the individual self into 

* xiii. 27 , see also viii. 20. ■ xiii. 1 and 5-6. 



THE THEISM OF THE BHAGAVADGITA 585 


its component parts of body, mind, soul, the Gita tries to 
discover the element which is always. The body is not the 
permanent subject, for it has an end, being only a fleeting 
frame. 1 The sense life is brief and mutable. 3 The empirical 
mind is ever changing. All these are only objects for a subject, 
the instruments through which the soul works. They have 
no existence in their own right. The inner principle, the 
source of all knowledge, is in the words of the Gita, “greater 
than the senses, the mind and the understanding.” 3 It is 
the element which combines and is present throughout even 
in deep sleep. This function of combination cannot be 
attributed to the senses or the understanding or a combination 
of these. 4 The principle of the subject is the indispensable 
basis on which the object world, including the empirical self, 
is based. If we drop the subject, the object vanishes. But 
the subject does not vanish even though the object disappears. 
The Gita gives eloquent descriptions of this undying element. 
It is the lord of the body. “ He is not born nor does He die, 
nor having been, does He cease to be any more. Unborn, 
eternal, everlasting, ancient, He is not slain when the body 
is destroyed.” 5 “ Weapons do not reach it, flame does not 

burn it nor water wet it. Wind does not dry it. It is 
impenetrable, uncombustible . . . perpetual, all pervading, 
stable, immovable, ancient.” 6 

About the nature of the supreme self, the Gita account 
is rather puzzling. “ This inexhaustible supreme self, 
being without beginning and without qualities, does not act 
and is not tainted, though stationed in the body.” 7 It 
is viewed as a mere spectator. The self is akartr, non-doer. 
The whole drama of evolution belongs to the object world. 
Intelligence, mind, senses are looked upon as the develop- 
ments of the unconscious prakrti, which is able to bring 
about this ascent on account of the presence of spirit. The 
subject self is within us calm and equal, uncaught in the 
external world, though its support, source and immanent 
witness. 

We have in the actual individuals of the world combina- 
tions of subject and object. 8 The empirical individuals are 

1 ii. 13. 11. iS. * ii. 14. 3 iii. 42 < xiii. 6. 

• 11. 20 . * ii. 22-25. ? xiii. 31. 1 xm. 27. 



536 INDIAN PHILOSOPHY 

the divine principle of subject limited by contexts of object. 
In the world the subject and the object are always found 
together. 1 Only the obj ect has not an ultimate transcendental 
existence. The subject superior to the object is the basis 
of the object. “ When a man sees all the variety of existence 
as rooted in one and all as emanating from that, he becomes 
one with the supreme.” 2 When the confusion with the object 
terminates, the subject in all is found to be the same. When 
Krsna urges Arjuna not to grieve for the dead, he says that 
death is not extinction. The individual form may change, 
but the essence is not destroyed. Until perfection is obtained, 
individuality persists. However repeatedly the mortal 
frame is destroyed, the inner individuality preserves its 
identity and takes on a new form. Buoyed up by this faith, 
man has to work for self-knowledge. Our imperishableness 
is guaranteed either by way of endlessness or perfection. 
It is the unfolding of our implicit infinitude. It is by this 
affirmation of the soul, by this vindication of the intuition 
of the Upanisads, that the Atman, or the pure subject, 
remains unaffected, even though our body be “ dust returning 
unto dust,” that Krsna stills the unrest of Arjuna's mind. 

Never the spirit was born ; the spirit shall cease to be never. 
Never was time it was not ; end and beginning are dreams ; 
Birthless and deathless and changeless remaineth the spirit for ever, 
Death hath not touched it at all, dead though the house of it seems.* 

In the spirit of the Upanisads the Gita identifies the two 
principles of the Atman and the Brahman. Behind the 
fleeting senses and the body there is the Atman ; behind the 
fleeting objects of the world there is Brahman. The two 
are one, being of identical nature. The reality of this is 
a matter of each man’s experience to be realised for himself. 
Any endeavour to define the unchanging in terms of the 
changing fails. There is, however, no attempt in the Gita 
to prove that the absolute discerned by intuition is the 
logical foundation of the world, though this is implied. If 
the world is to be an experience and not a chaotic confusion, 
then we require the reality of an unconditioned absolute. 

» xiii. 20-21. » xiii. 31. 

I Sir Edwin Arnold's translation. 



THE THEISM OF THE BHAGAVADGlTA 537 


We should, however, be very careful not to oppose the 
infinite and the finite as two mutually exclusive spheres. 
This will lead us to a false view of the infinite. What strikes 
us at first is the distinction between the passing finite and the 
real infinite. But if this were all, then the infinite becomes 
finitised, converted into something limited, since the opposed 
and the excluded finite becomes the limit of the infinite. 
It is wrong to conceive the infinite as something pushed 
out of the being of the finite. It is the finite itself in its 
truth. It is the infinitised finite, the real in the finite, and 
not something lying side by side with it. If we overlook the 
infinite in the finite, we get an endless progress peculiar to 
the world of finitude or samsara. This very endlessness is 
the sign of the infinite within the sphere of the finite. The 
finite reveals itself as nothing more than the infinite made 
finite. The distinction between the infinite and the finite 
is only a characteristic of loose thinking. In truth there is 
only the infinite, and the finite is nothing more than the 
finitisation of the infinite. It follows that terms like 
transcendence and immanence are inapplicable, since these 
assume a distinct “ other ” to the absolute. Any category 
of thought is inadequate for the purposes of the absolute. 
It is described as neither being nor non-being, neither formed 
nor unformed . 1 The Gita reiterates the Upanisad principle 
that the real is the immutable self-existence behind the 
cosmic world, with its space, time and causality. 

The Gita asserts the truth of an advaita or non-dualism 
in philosophy. The supreme Brahman is the immutable self- 
existence “of which the Vedantins speak, to which the doers 
of the austerities attain. ” It is the highest status and supreme 
goal of the soul’s movement in time, though it is itself no 
movement, but a status original, eternal and supreme. In 
the unalterable eternity of Brahman, all that moves and 
evolves is founded. By it they exist ; they cannot be without 
't, though it causes nothing, does nothing and determines 
nothing. The two, Brahman and the world, seem to be 
opposed in features. Even though we repudiate the reality 
of samsara and look upon it as a mere shadow, still there is 
the substance of which it is the shadow. The world of 


5 xiii. 12. 



538 INDIAN PHILOSOPHY 

samsara shows its unreality by its constant struggle to over- 
reach itself, but the absolute Brahman is its own end, and 
looks to no end beyond itself. Since the world of samsara 
is based on the absolute, the latter is sometimes said to be 
both the changeless and the changing. The endless details 
and the oppositions of the samsara are there just to turn the 
mind in the direction where all oppositions are overcome and 
successions are embraced in a successionless consciousness. 
While all possible relatives and opposites are only based on 
it, it is not opposed to them, being their very substratum. 
We do not know how exactly the world of samsara is based 
on the absolute Brahman, though we are sure that without 
the absolute there would be no samsara. There is the silent 
sleeper as well as the seething sea. We do not know how 
exactly the two are related. We conceal our ignorance by 
the use of the word maya. The two are one, yet they seem 
different, and the seeming is due to maya. The transcendental 
reality, though untouched by the changes, still determines 
them. From the philosophical point of view we are obliged 
to stop here. “ Who could perceive directly and who 
could declare whence born or why this variegated 
creation ? ” 1 

The same problem when applied to the individual self 
becomes one of the relation of the free subject to the object. 
The bond between the immortal witness self and the flowing 
changes of consciousness, we do not know. Samkara in 
this difficulty adopts the hypothesis of adhyasa or super- 
position. The two, subject and object, cannot be related by 
way of samyoga or contact, since the subject is partless. 
The relation cannot be samavaya, or inseparable inherence, 
since the two are not related as cause and effect. Samkara con- 
cludes, “ that it must be of the nature of mutual adhyasa, 
i.e. it consists in confounding them as well as their attributes 
with each other, owing to the absence of a discrimination 
between the nature of object and that of subject, like the 
union of mother-of-pearl and silver or of rope and snake when 
they are mistaken the one for the other owing to the absence 
of discrimination. The union of the two is itself apparent, 
mithyajnana, and it vanishes when a man attains to right 

1 Taittiriya Brahmana, ii. 8-9. 



THE THEISM OF THE BHAGAVADGlTA 539 


knowledge.” 1 This theory is not found in the Gita, however 
much it may be implied by it. 

The metaphysical idealism of the Upanisads is trans- 
formed in the Gita into a theistic religion, providing room 
for love, faith, prayer and devotion. So long as we do 
not have the vision of the absolute, but are working from the 
side of the empirical world, we can account for it only on 
the theory of the supreme godhead of Purusottama. The 
impersonality of the absolute is not its whole significance for 
man. The Gita, anxious to adapt the Upanisad idealism 
to the daily life of mankind, supports a divine activity and 
participation in nature. It tries to give us a God who satisfies 
the whole being of man, a real which exceeds the mere infinite 
and the mere finite. The supreme soul is the origin and cause 
of the world, the indivisible energy pervading all life. Moral 
attributes are combined with the metaphysical . 2 The Gita 
refuses to commit the fallacy of taking distinctions for 
divisions. It reconciles all abstract oppositions. Thought 
cannot act without creating distinctions and reconciling them. 
The moment we think the absolute, we have to translate 
the truth of intuition into terms of thought. Pure ‘‘being ” 
is gone over into " nothing,” and we have left in our hands 
a unity of being and nothing. This unity is as real as thought 
itself. Of course the Gita does not tell us of the way in which 
the absolute as impersonal non-active spirit becomes the 
active personal Lord creating and sustaining the universe. 
The problem is considered to be intellectually insoluble. The 
mystery clears up only when we rise to the level of intuition. 
The transformation of the absolute into God is maya or a 
mystery. It is also maya in the sense that the transformed 
world is not so real as the absolute itself. 

If through logic we try to understand the relation of the 
absolute to the world we assign to it a power or £akti. The 
inactive qualityless absolute, unrelated to any object, is con- 
verted by logic into the active personal Lord possessing 
power related to prakrti or nature. We have " Narayana 
brooding over the waters,” the eternal “ I ” confronting the 
pseudo-eternal “ not I.” This latter is also called prakrti 
or nature, since it generates the world. It is the source of 
* S.B.G., xiii. 26. ’ B.G., viii. 9 and 13. 

VOL. I 


18 



540 INDIAN PHILOSOPHY 

delusion, since it hides the true nature of reality from mortal 
vision. The world is organically connected with the Puru- 
sottama. All things partake of the duality of being and 
non-being from Purusottama downwards. The element 
of negation is introduced into the absolute, and the unity 
is forced to unfold its inwardness in the process of becoming. 
The “ ancient urge to action ” is located in the heart of 
Purusottama. The original unity is pregnant with the 
whole course of the world, which contains the past, the present 
and the future in a supreme now. Krsna shows to Arjuna 
the whole vi^varupa (worldform) in one vast shape . 1 In the 
radiance of eternity Arjuna sees nameless things, the form 
of Krsna bursting the very bounds of existence, filling the 
whole sky and the universe, worlds coursing through him 
like cataracts. Contradiction constitutes the main spring 
of progress. Even God has the element of negativity 
or maya, though He controls it. The supreme God puts 
forth His active nature or svamprakrtim and creates the 
jivas, who work out their destinies along lines determined by 
their own nature. While all this is done by the supreme 
through his native power exercised in the perishable world, 
he has another aspect untouched by it all. He is the im- 
personal absolute as well as the immanent will. He is the 
causeless cause, the unmoved mover. 

He is within all beings — and without — 

Motionless, yet still moving ; not discerned 
For subtlety of instant presence ; close 
To all, to each ; yet measurelessly far ; 

Not manifold, and yet subsisting still 
In all which lives. 

The light of lights, he is in the heart of the dark 
Shining eternally.’ 

The supreme is said to be possessed of two natures higher, 
para, and lower, apara, answering to the conscious and 
the unconscious aspects of the universe. The lower prakrti 
produces effects and modifications in the world of nature or 
of causes ; the higher prakrti gives rise to the purusas, or 
the intelligent souls, in the world of ends or values. The two 

1 B.G., chap, xi ; vi. 29 ; vii. 8-9 ; viii. 22 ; x. 

* xiii. 15-18. Sir Edwin Arnold’s translation. 



’ THE THEISM OF THE BHAGAVADGITA 541 


belong to one spiritual whole. Madhva cites a verse to this 
effect : “ There are two prakrtis for God, jada, or unconscious, 
and ajada, or conscious; the former is unmanifested prakrti ; 
the latter is Sri or Laksmi, which upholds the former. She 
is the consort of Narayana. With these two Hari creates the 
world.” 1 * 3 4 The Gita accepts the Samkhya theory of the evolu- 
tion of the manifold from the homogeneous indeterminate 
matter, determined by the presence of spirit or purusa. 
Only the presence of purusa necessary to stimulate prakrti 
to activity must be a real presence. It is therefore more 
correct to say that all activity is due to the combined effort 
of purusa and prakrti, though the element of intelligence 
is more prominent in the subjective and that of matter in the 
objective world. Both of them form the nature of the one 
Supreme. They are the constitutive stuff of the world.* 
That is why the Lord is said to be the support of the world 
as wall as the all-illumining light of consciousness. The author 
of the Gita does not describe the way in which the one nature 
of God manifests itself at one stage as unconscious matter, 
at another as conscious intelligence, and how these two 
products of one primal source appear to be antagonistic to 
each other during the course of the world progress. 3 

While dwelling in man and nature the Supreme is greater 
than both. The boundless universe in an endless space and 
time rests in Him and not He in it. The expression of God 
may change, but in Him is an element which is self-identical, 
the permanently fixed background for the phenomenal altera- 
tions. The diversified existence does not affect His identity. 4 


1 Commentary on vii. 5. 

* Ramanuja says : “ From the connexion between the unintelligent 
prakrti and the intelligent embryo cast into it (14. 3) there results the 
origin of all beings, which beginning from the gods and ending with im- 
movable things are all mixed up with the non-intelligent thing.” (R.B.G., 
13. 2.) Ramanuja, however, holds that these beings possess an ultimate 
existence distinct from that of Isvara, though the Gita is definite that 
the undivided Brahman is not really divided, but only seems to be so 
(vibhaktam iva, 13. 16). 

3 We are not, therefore, in a position to institute any comparison between 
the Gita conception of the Purusottama, or the whole, and Bergson’s theory 
of an eternal duree, or of the Gita doctrine of puru?a and prakrti with 
Bergson's conception of life and matter. 

4 M.B., 5 antiparva, 339-344. 



542 INDIAN PHILOSOPHY 

“As the mighty air everywhere moving is rooted in space so 
all things are in Me.” 1 Yet space is space even without the 
“ moving airs.” The Lord is not tainted by the qualities 
of creation. The world as the expression of His nature does 
not detract from the self-sufficiency of God. Yet we cannot 
know the nature of God apart from the constitution of the 
world. If the identical principle is emptied of all content, 
of all that constitutes progress in knowledge and life, the God- 
in-Itself may become unknowable. It is also true that if 
we lose ourselves in the world, the reality may be hidden from 
our vision. It is necessary for us to know what God is 
independent of all relations to objects, and how He maintains 
Himself throughout all changes He brings about. Simply 
because relatedness to objects cannot be excluded, we need 
not think that the subject has no self-identity. If the 
expression is confused with the spirit, the Gita theory will 
become one of cosmotheism. The author of the Gita, however, 
explicitly repudiates such suggestions. The whole world 
is said to be sustained by one part of God, “ ekariAena.” 2 
In the tenth chapter Krsna declares that He is manifesting 
only a portion of His endless glory. The immutability of 
the absolute and the activity of the Hvara are both taken 
over in the conception of Purusottama. 

The personal Purusottama is from the religious point of 
view higher than the immutable self-existence untouched by 
the subjective and the objective appearances of the universe. 
Pie is looked upon as an impartial governor ever ready to 
help those in distress. Simply because He sometimes inflicts, 
punishments we cannot call Him unjust or unkind. Srldhara 
quotes a verse which reads: “ Even as a mother is not 
unkind to her child whether she fondles or beats him, so also 
ISvara, the determiner of good and evil, is not unkind.” 3 
The impersonal absolute is envisaged as Purusottama for the 
purposes of religion. The idea of Purusottama is not a 
wilful self-deception accepted by the weak heart of man. 
While the dry light of reason gives us a featureless reality, 
spiritual intuition reveals to us a God who is both 
personal and impersonal. The principle of reconciliation 


1 ix. 6; ix. 10. * x. 42. 

5 Commentary on the Gita, iv. 8. 



THE THEISM OF THE BHAGAVADGlTA 543 


is contained in the Upanisads. The Isa Upanisad looks 
upon the real as both the mobile and the immobile. To dwell 
on either exclusively results in a darkness of knowledge or 
of ignorance. The Gita tries to make a synthesis of the 
imperishable self and the changing experience. The supreme 
spiritual being with energy is Purusottama ; the same in 
a state of eternal rest is Brahman. Samkarananda quotes 
a verse which says : “ There are two forms of Vasudeva, the 
manifested and the unmanifested ; the Parabrahman is 
the unmanifested, and the whole world of moving and un- 
moving things is the manifested.” 1 The Supreme has two 
aspects of the manifested and the unmanifested ; the former 
is emphasised when prakrti is assigned to its nature and 
Jiva is said to be a part of it. 1 The stress is on the same side 
when Krsna says : " Whatever is glorious, good, beautiful 
and mighty, understand that it all proceeds from a fragment 
of my splendour.” 3 When Krsna calls upon us to become 
his devotees, when he shows the viivarupa, or the world- 
form, whenever he uses the first person, we have references 
to the manifested aspect of the Supreme. 4 This side of divine 
nature is involved in the work of creation, where it loses 
itself in the succession of time and the waves of becoming. 
Beyond it all is another status, the silent and the immutable, 
than which there is nothing higher. The two together form 
the Purusottama. If we try to make out that the personal 
Lord is the highest metaphysical reality we get into trouble. 
“ I will declare that in the object of knowledge, knowing which 
one reaches immortality, the highest Brahman, having no 
beginning or end, which cannot be said to be existent or 
non-existent.” 5 The author of the Gita frequently reminds 
us that the manifested aspect is a creation of his own mystic 
power, or yoga maya. 6 “ The undiscerning ones, not knowing 
my transcendental and inexhaustible essence, than which 
there is nothing higher, think me, who am unperceived, to 
have become perceptible.” 7 On ultimate analysis the 
assumption of the form of Purusottama by the absolute 


1 Commentary on the Gita, iv. u. 
1 xv. 7. 

r ix. 34 ; xiv. 27 ; xviii 65. 

‘ vii. 25. 


J x. 41. 

5 R.B.G., xiii. u. 
T vii. 24. 



544 INDIAN PHILOSOPHY 

becomes less than real. It is therefore wrong to argue that 
according to the Gita the impersonal self is lower in reality 
than the personal Dvara, though it is true that the Gita 
considers the conception of a personal God to be more useful 
for religious purposes. 

Before we pass on to the cosmology of the Gita, we may 
note the relation between the conception of Purusottama 
and Krsna, thus raising the question of the avatars or 
incarnations. 

Whether Krsna is identical with Purusottama or only 
a limited manifestation of Him is a question on which there 
is difference of opinion. The theory of avatars is mentioned 
in the Gita. “ Even though I am unborn and inexhaustible 
in my essence, even though I am Lord of all beings, still 
assuming control over my own prakrti, I am born by means 
of my maya.” 1 The avatars are generally limited mani- 
festations of the Supreme, though the Bhagavata makes 
an exception in favour of Krsna, and makes him a full 
manifestation, “ Krsnas tu bhagavan svayam.” The form 
given to him is indicative of his all-comprehensiveness. The 
peacock feathers of his head are the variegated colours which 
flood man’s eyes. The colour of his complexion is that of 
the sky, the garland of wild flowers typifies the grandeur 
of the solar and the stellar systems. The flute he plays 
upon is that by which he gives forth his message. The yellow 
garment with which he decks his person is the halo of light 
which pervades space, the mark on his chest is the emblem 
of the devotion of the devotee which he proudly wears out 
of love to man. He stands in the devotee’s heart, and so 
great is his grace to man that his feet, which symbolise it, 
are put one over the other so that they may have their full 
effect. Samkara and Anandagiri look upon Krsna as only 
a partial manifestation of the supreme godhead . 2 Krsna, 
in the opinion of the author of the Gita, is the Purusottama. 
“ The foolish mistake me, clad in human form, ignorant of 
my supreme nature, the great Lord of all beings.” J 

« iv. 6. 

* Amsena sambabhflva, or born of a part. Samkara. Anandagiri, com- 
menting on it, says that it is an illusory form created by his own will. 
Svecchaniimitena mSyimayena avarflpeva. » ix. n. 



THE THEISM OF THE BHAGAVADGITA 545 

The theory of avatars brings to mankind a new spiritual 
message. The avatars are the militant gods struggling against 
sin and evil, death and destruction. “ Whensoever righteous- 
ness languishes and unrighteousness is on the ascendant, 
I create myself. I am born age after age, for the protection 
of the good, for the destruction of the evildoers and the 
establishment of the law.” 1 It is an eloquent expression of 
the law of the spiritual world. If God is looked upon as the 
saviour of man, He must manifest Himself whenever the 
forces of evil threaten to destroy human values. According 
to Hindu mythology, whenever the forces of vice and wicked- 
ness, a Ravana or a Kamsa are in the ascendant, the repre- 
sentatives of the moral order, Indra, Brahma, etc., along with 
Earth, which is said to suffer most, go to the court of Heaven 
and cry aloud for a world redeemer. The work of redemption, 
however, is a constant activity, though on occasions it 
becomes accentuated. The normal self-manifestation of 
God becomes emphatic when the world-order grows dis- 
proportionately evil. An avatar is a descent of God into 
man, and not an ascent of man into God. Though every 
conscious being is such a descent, it is only a veiled manifesta 
tion. There is a distinction between the self-conscious being 
of the divine and the same shrouded in ignorance. The human 
being is as good as an avatar, provided he crosses the maya 
of the world and transcends his imperfection. The creator 
Purusottama is not separated from his creatures. The two 
do not exist apart. He is always fulfilling himself in the 
world. Man comes to full consciousness by actualising his 
potentiality. It becomes indifferent, then, whether we say God 
limits Himself in the form of man or man rises to God work- 
ing through his nature. Yet an avatar generally means a 
God who limits Himself for some purpose on earth, and 
possesses even in His limited form the fullness of 
knowledge. 

The philosophical intellect tries to relate the avatars, 
or the ideals of perfection, to the great onward march of the 
world. The superior souls who focussed representative 
ages in their own selves became the embodiments of God 
in a special sense. These examples of men who established 

1 iv. See also Tevijja Sutta ; Mahanirvaija Tantra, iv. 



546 


INDIAN PHILOSOPHY 


supremacy over their nature and made their outward sub- 
stance reveal the God within are more effective for struggling 
individuals. From them can man take courage and try to 
grow into their stature. They are the moulds into which the 
seeking soul tries to cast itself, that it might grow towards 
God. What has been achieved by one man, a Christ or a 
Buddha, may be repeated in the lives of other men. The 
struggle towards the sanctifying of the earth or the revealing 
of the God-ideal has passed through several stages in the 
evolution on earth. The ten avatars of Visnu mark out 
the central steps. The growth in the sub-human or the 
animal level is emphasised in those of the fish, the tortoise 
and the boar. Next we have the transition between the animal 
and the human worlds in the man-lion. The development 
is not completely fulfilled when we come to the dwarf. The 
first stage of man is that of the brutish, violent, uncivilised 
Rama with his axe, who devastates the rest of humanity; 
later we get the divine spiritual Rama, who consecrates family 
life and affections, and Krsna, who exhorts us to enter into the 
warfare of the world ; and after him Buddha, who, full of com- 
passion for all life, works for the redemption of mankind. Last 
of all we have the avatar yet to come, the militant God 
(Kalki) who fights evil and injustice with the sword in hand. 
Great crises in human progress are signalised by the appear- 
ance of avatars. 


VI 

The World of Change 

To know the exact place of the maya theory in the Gita, 
it is necessary to distinguish the different senses in which the 
word is employed, and the exact bearings of the Gita on them 
all. (i) If the supreme reality is unaffected by the events of 
the world, then the rise of these events becomes an inexplicable 
mystery. The author of the Gita does not use the term maya 
in this sense, however much it may be implied in his views, 
the conception of a beginningless, and at the same time 
unreal, avidya causing the illusion of the world does not 
enter the mind of the author. (2) The personal Isvara is said 



THE THEISM OF THE BHAGAVADGlTA 547 


to combine within himself sat and asat, the immutability of 
Brahman as well as the mutation of becoming. 1 Maya is the 
power which enables him to produce mutable nature. It is 
Sakti, or the energy of Isvara, or atmavibhuti, the power of 
self-becoming. Bvara and maya in this sense are mutually 
dependent and are both beginningless. 2 This power of the 
supreme is called maya in the Gita. 3 (3) Since the Lord is 
able to produce the universe by means of the two elements of 
His being, prakrti and purusa, matter and consciousness, 
they are said to be maya (higher and lower) of God . 4 
(4) Gradually maya comes to mean the lower prakrti, since 
purusa is said to be the seed which the Lord casts into the 
womb of prakrti for the generation of the universe. (5) As 
the manifested world hides the real from the vision of the 
mortals, it is said to be delusive in its character. 5 The world 
is not an illusion .though by regarding it as a mere mechanical 
determination of nature unrelated to God, we fail to perceive 
its divine essence. It becomes the source of delusion. The 
divine maya becomes avidyamaya. It is so, however, 
only for us mortals, shut off from the truth ; to God who knows 
it all and controls it, it is vidyamaya. Maya to man is a 
source of trouble and misery, since it breeds a bewildering 
partial consciousness which loses hold of the full reality. 
God seems to be enveloped in the immense cloak of maya. 6 
(6) Since the world is only an effect of God, who is the cause, 
and since everywhere the cause is more real than the effect, 
the world as effect is said to be less real than God the cause. 
This relative unreality of the world is confirmed by the 
self-contradictory nature of the process of becoming. There is 
a struggle of opposites in the world of experience, and the 
real is above all opposites .7 

There is, however, no indication that the changes of the 
world are only imaginary. 8 Even Samkara’s non-dualism 

1 ix. ig. j See !§andilya Sutras, ii. 13 and 15. 

3 xviii. 61 ; iv. 6. 4 iv. 16. 5 vii. 14 ; vii. 25. 

6 Maya which does not produce avidya is said to be sattviki maya. When 
it is polluted it breeds ignorance, or avidya. Brahman reflected in the 
former is Isvara, while that reflected in the latter is jlva, or the individual elf. 
This is later Vedanta, see Pancadasi, i. 15-17. The Gita is not aware oi 
this view. 

7 ii. 45 ; vii. 28. 


VOL. I 


1 iii. 28; iv. 6; vii. 14; xiv. 23. 

18*. 



548 


INDIAN PHILOSOPHY 


admits of real changes in the world ; only the first change 
of Brahman into the world is regarded by him as an appearance, 
or vivarta. The world is a real emanation from the supreme 
Purusottama ; only from the ultimate point of view it is not 
real, since it is ever at war with itself. The Gita repudiates 
the view that “ the world is untrue, without any fixed basis, 
devoid of any ruler, brought about by union caused by lust 
and nothing else.” 1 It follows that in the world we have a 
real development presided over by I £ vara. We cannot say 
that the Gita looked upon the world as real only so long as 
we lived in it. There is no suggestion that the world is a 
troublous dream on the bosom of the infinite. While living 
in the world of becoming, it is possible, according to the Gita, 
to possess the immortality of timeless self-existence. We have 
the supreme example of Purusottama, who makes use of the 
world undeluded by it. When we transcend maya, time, 
space and cause do not fall away from us. The world does 
not disappear, but it only changes its meaning. 

Purusottama is not a remote phenomenon in some 
supreme state beyond us all, but is in the body and heart of 
every man and thing. He maintains all existences in relation 
to one another. The world of souls and matter is the effect 
of his nature. God does not create the world out of a nothing- 
ness or a void, but from His own being. In the pralaya 
condition the whole world, including jivas, exists in the divine 
in a subtle state. In the manifested state they are cut off 
from one another and forget their identity of source. All 
this is his sovereign yoga. The world is compared to a tree 
“ with root above and branches below.” » Prakrti is a general 
feature of the world. The interminable antagonisms, the 
mutual devourings of the various forms of existence, the 
evolving, the differentiating, the organising and the vivifying 
of matter are all due to prakrti. “ Earth, water, fire, air, 
space, mind, buddhi or understanding, self-sense or ahamkara 
are the eight-fold divisions of my prakrti.” This is God’s 
lower nature. That which vitalises these and sustains the 
world is His higher. 3 Ramanuja writes : “ The prakrti, or 
the material nature of the universe, is an object of enjoyment ; 

1 xvi. 8. 1 xv. i. 

I vii. 4-5 ; see also R.B.G. on vii. 4-5. 



THE THEISM OF THE BHAGAVADGlTA 549 


that which is other than this, which is insentient and object 
of enjoyment, is the life principle jiva, which is of a different 
order. It is the enjoyer of the lower one, and is in the form 
of intelligent souls.” The Gita supports Ramanuja’s view of 
reality, if we ignore its absolutist background and emphasise 
^he idea of Purusottama with its dual nature of conscious- 
ness and matter. The metaphor of beads and string, according 
to Ramanuja, points out how “ the totality of intelligences 
and non-intelligent things, both in their state of cause and in 
the state of effect, which form my body, are like a number 
of gems on a string that hangs from me, who have mv being 
in the Atman.” 1 

The individual soul is said to be a portion of the lord, 
mamaivamsah. 2 fsamkara is not faithful to the intention of 
the author of the Gita when he says that “ amsa,” or part, 
indicates an imaginary or apparent part only. It is a real 
form of Purusottama. Samkara’s position is correct if 
the reference is to the indivisible Brahman, who is partless, 
but then even Purusottama is imaginary, since there is in 
him an element of not-self. The actual individual is a kartr 
or doer ; so he is not the pure immortal spirit, but the personal 
self, which is a limited manifestation of God. This portion is 
kept distinct on account of the form which it draws to itself, 
the senses and the mind. As the prakrti has a definite 
magnitude, duration and vibration, even so does purusha 
acquire a definite extent and reach of consciousness. The 
universal is embodied in a limited context of a mental-vital- 
physical sheath. “ Purusa joined with prakrti enjoys the 
qualities born of nature and the cause of its birth, good or 
evil, is its connexion with the qualities.” 3 

VII 

The Individual Self 

The individuals are subject to maya, or delusion, being lost 
in outer appearances. 4 Birth in the world of samsara is 
the result of imperfection. Rotation in the circle of existence 

1 R.B.G., vii. 7. 

1 xiii. 21. 


* xv. 7. 

« vn. 13 ; 26 . 27. 



550 


INDIAN PHILOSOPHY 


is inevitable so long as we are blind to the truth. We get 
rid of individuality when we transcend maya and realise our 
true status. Any form the individual assumes is doomed to 
be superseded. The individual always tries to become some- 
thing else. The infinite character cannot become fully explicit 
in any finite existence. It ever keeps on transcending its 
own finite self until the becoming reaches its end in being 
and the finite is taken over into the infinite. The finite 
world is an endless progress, an infinite perfectibility, an ever 
approximating approach to an ever-growing object of desire. 
It follows that all distinctions based on becoming and 
connexions with prakrti are only transient. The etemality 
and plurality of purusas is assumed in the Gita when its 
thought rests at the level of Purusottama. The jivas, then, 
are only distinct fragments of Purusottama individualised. 
From the standpoint of absolute truth, their individuality is 
dependent upon the object element. Even in this world 
those acts indicative of separate individuality are not due to 
the immortal actionless spirit, but are derived from the forces 
of prakrti. “ The qualities born of prakrti constrain every- 
body to some action.” 1 If the puru§as are eternal, it cannot 
be any delusion to think that they are the doers and are 
different from each other. The Gita says : ” He whose mind is 
deluded by egoism thinks himself the doer of actions which 
are wrought by the qualities of prakrti.” “ Qualities move 
among qualities.” 2 It is a confusion with the object that 
is responsible for the false view of individuality. The basis 
of distinction is then not-self, while the self is the same in 
all, “ dog or dog-eater.” 3 It is easy for Samkara to press all 
these passages into the service of his non-dualism. He says : 
“ Nor are there what are called ultimate differentiae, or 
antyaviSesas, as the basis of individual distinctions in the 
self, since no evidence can be adduced to prove their existence 
in relation to the several bodies. Hence Brahman is homo- 
geneous and one.” 4 We need not assume indefinable marks 
of individual identity to account for the distinctions of the 
world. Individuals are different because of their embodi- 
ments. As the Mahabharata says : “ A man bound up with 

1 iii. 5. * iii. 27-28. 

i v. 18 ; xiii. 2. 22. 4 S.B.G., y. 19. 



THE THEISM OF THE BHAGAVADGlTA 551 


gv.nas is a jivatma, or individual soul ; when freed from them, 
he is paramatma, or supreme soul.” 1 Passages which 
proclaim the identity of the individual with the supreme are 
interpreted by Ramanuja in a different way. For example, 
the declaration that “ Brahman in each possesses hands and 
feet everywhere and envelops all ” is taken by Ramanuja 
to mean that “ the purified nature of the Atman, by virtue 
of its being devoid of the limitations of the body and such 
other objects, pervades all things.” 3 Again, when the Gita 
says that the Purusa in each is “ the witness, the permitter, 
the supporter, the enjoyer, the great lord and the supreme 
self,” Ramanuja is perplexed. “ Such a purusa, by virtue 
of his connexion with gunas, produced by the prakrti, 
becomes the great ruler only with reference to this body, 
and the highest Atman only with reference to this 
body.” 3 

From an occasional singular or plural usage we cannot 
draw any inference about the ultimate nature of the soul. 
When the stress is on the empirical side the plural number 
is used. “ Never did I not exist, nor thou, nor these rulers 
of men ; and no one of us will ever hereafter cease to exist.” 4 
It is easy to infer from this a doctrine of the eternal plurality 
of souls. Ramanuja observes : “ the Lord Himself declares 
that the distinction of the self from the Lord as well as 
from other selves is the highest reality.” Samkara, on the 
other hand, urges “ as the self, the Atman, w r e are eternal in 
all the three periods of time (past, present and future).” 
He believes that the plural is used with reference to the 
bodies, which are different, as is clear from the next verse 
relating to rebirth and not with reference to self. Meta- 
physically there is only one spirit. 5 

The Gita believes in rebirth until the ultimate state is 
reached. Birth following upon imperfection is bound to 
death, and vice versa. Birth and death occur as infancy, 
youth and age occur to a man’s frame. 


* ^antiparva, 187. 24. 

» R.B.G., xii. 13. 

1 R.B.G., xiii. 23 ; see also xiii. 33. 
< R.B.G. and S.B.G., ii. 12. 
s viii. 4 ; xiii. 31. 



552 


INDIAN PHILOSOPHY 


Nay, but as when one layeth 
His wornout robes away 
And taking new ones, sayeth 
“ These will I wear to-day.’’ 

So putteth by the spirit 
Lightly its garb of flesh, 

And passeth to inherit 
A residence afresh. 1 

Death only changes the scene. The instrument through 
which the player can express himself must be intact. The 
gradual failure of powers in old age, or their temporary failure 
in illness, though physical, reacts on the core of mind’s being. 
When the body dies he is supplied with a new instrument. Our 
life does not die with us : when one body wears out it will 
take another. The kind of birth depends on the character we 
have developed. We are born in celestial regions, or as men 
on earth, or in the animal world, according as we develop 
character in which sattva, rajas or tamas predominates. 
Every step we gain is conserved for us. When Arjuna asks 
Krsna about the fate of those who are not able to attain 
perfection, whether they go to ruin, Krsna says that a man 
who does good never goes to ruin, but he obtains another birth 
“ when he recovers the mental characteristics of his former life, 
and with them he again struggles onward for perfection.” 3 
There is a conservation of all values. None can lose the way 
of the supreme if his heart is set on it. Rebirth continues 
till the goal is reached.3 The suksma sarira, or the subtle 
body, consisting of the senses and the mind, survives death 
and is the bearer of character.4 Rebirth is a discipline by 
which we can perfect ourselves. There is also a reference to 
the path of the gods through which the samsarins pass. 5 
The third path of the sinful is also mentioned. 6 

VIII 

Ethics 

The distinctness of particular persons, their finiteness and 
individuality, are only accidental, and do not represent the 

■ ii. 22. Sir Edwin Arnold’s translation. See also ii. 13 ; ii. 27. 

* vi. 44-5. * vii. 19. 4 xv. 8. 

i viii. 23-26. ‘ ix. 12 ; xvi. 19-21. 



THE THEISM OF THE BHAGAVADGlTA 553 


underlying truth. The individual will not gain the secret 
of peace, stable and secure, until he breaks down his apparent 
self-completeness and independence. True freedom means 
self-transcendence or union with the highest through logic, 
love or life. The end we seek is becoming Brahman or 
touching the eternal, brahmasariisparsam. This is the only 
absolute value . 1 

It is in the power of all to destroy evil, to eliminate the 
corruption of the flesh, to redeem the lower nature and rescue 
the senses from bondage to passion. Each struggling indi- 
vidual will have to make a sustained endeavour to look into the 
truth with his own eyes, judge with his own reason, and love 
with his own heart A half-truth won for ourselves is worth 
more than a whole truth learned from others. 

Man is a complex of reason, will and emotion, and so seeks 
the true delight of his being through all these. He can reach 
the end by a knowledge of the supreme reality, or by love 
and adoration of the supreme person, or by the subjection of 
his will to the divine purpose. There is the impulse in him 
forcing him to get beyond his little self in these different 
directions. The end is the same whichever standpoint we 
adopt. It is the harmonious efficiency of the several sides of 
our life by which truth is attained, beauty created and conduct 
perfected. The Gita is emphatic that no side of conscious 
life can be excluded. The several aspects reach their fulfil- 
ment in the integral divine life. God himself is sat, cit and 
ananda, reality, truth and bliss. The absolute reveals itself 
to those seeking for knowledge as the Eternal Light, clear 
and radiant as the sun at noon-day in which is no darkness ; 
to those struggling for virtue as the Eternal Righteousness, 
steadfast and impartial ; and to those emotionally inclined 
as Eternal Love and Beauty of Holiness. Even as God com- 
bines in Himself wisdom, goodness and holiness, so should men 
aim at the integral life of spirit. The obstructions of the road 
are not operative when we reach the end. It is true that in 
the finite life of the individual there seems to be some kind of 
antagonism between contemplation and action. This is only 
a sign of our imperfection. When Krsna is asked about the 
particular method to be adopted, he clearly says that we need 
* vi. 20, 23, 27 and 28. 



554 


INDIAN PHILOSOPHY 


not worry about this question, since the different pathways 
are not ultimately distinct, but lead to the same goal, and are 
found together in the end though they cross and recross one 
another on the road. Man does not function in fractions. 
Progress is correlated and not dissociated development. 
Knowledge, feeling and will are different aspects of the one 
movement of the soul. 

The Gita tries to harmonise the different ideals of life 
current at the time and correct their extravagances. 
Intellectual inquiry, strenuous self-sacrifice, fervent devotion, 
ceremonial observance and yogic exercises were looked upon 
as affording access to the divine . 1 The Gita synthesises them 
all and shows the exact place and value of each of them. 
It believes in the effectiveness of a combined attack. The 
harmonising ideal which all these different methods have in 
view is the increasing solidarity of the individual with the 
universe presided over by Purusottama. 

Madhusudana Sarasvati considers that the Gita adopts the 
three methods indicated in the Upanisads, karma or work, 
upasana or worship, and jnana or wisdom, and devotes six 
chapters to each in succession. Whatever be the truth of 
it, it emphasises the three great divisions of conscious life. 
The Gita recognises that different men are led to the spiritual 
vision by different approaches, some by the perplexities of 
the moral life, some by the doubts of the intellect, and some 
by the emotional demands for perfection. 


IX 

JSana Marga 

The logical mind, unable to acquiesce in the partial, tries 
to grasp the totality of things, and finds no rest until it is 

1 Cf. Ploti' us : " There are different roads by which this end (of spiritual 
apprehension) may be reached : the love of beauty which exalts the poet ; that 
devotion to the One and that ascent of science which make the ambition 
of the philosopher ; that love and those prayers by which some devout and 
ardent soul tends in its moral purity towards perfection. These are the 
great highways conducting to that height above the actual and the particular, 
where we stand in the immediate presence of the Infinite, who shines out 
as from the deeps of the soul." (Letter to Flaccus.) 



THE THEISM OF THE BHAGAYAHGlTA 555 


anchored in the truth. It is buoyed up by the undying faith 
in its destiny to acquire supreme truth. 1 The Gita recognises 
two kinds of knowledge, that which seeks to understand 
the phenomena of existence externally through intellect, 
and that which by the force of intuition grasps the ultimate 
principle behind the apparent series. When subject to the 
logical intellect, the spirit of man tends to lose itself in nature 
and identify itself with its activities. To grasp the truth 
of existence in its source and reality within, it has to free 
itself from the snare of false identification. The intellectual 
apprehension of the details of existence is called vijnana, as 
distinct from jnana, or the integral knowledge of the common 
foundation of all existence. These two are only different sides 
of one pursuit. All knowledge is knowledge of God. Science 
and philosophy both try to realise the truth of the oneness 
of things in the eternal spirit. Scientific knowledge is said 
to be dominated by rajas, while spiritual knowledge is per- 
meated by the quality of sattva. If we mistake the partial 
truths of science for the whole truth of spirit, we have the 
inferior knowledge, where the lowest quality of tamas 
predominates. 2 The truth of the soul is a hypothesis so 
long as we are at the level of science. The endless becoming 
covers up the being. Science dispels the darkness oppressing 
the mind, shows up the incompleteness of its own world, and 
prepares the mind for something beyond it. It stimulates 
humility, since by its means we cannot know all. We are 
hemmed in between the forgetfulness of what was and the 
uncertainty of what shall be. To indulge in the imaginative 
desire to become acquainted with the first causes of things 
and the destiny of mankind, science admits, is a vain pursuit. 
If we want to get at the ultimate truth science has to be 
supplemented by another discipline. The Gita holds that 
paripra^na, or investigation, is to be combined with service, 
or seva.5 For the development of the intuitive power we 
require a tunning of the mind in another direction, a conversion 
of the soul. Arjuna could not see the truth with his naked 


1 “ Blessedness consists in love towards God, and this arises from know- 
ledge.” (Spinoza.) " With certain persons the intellectual effort to under- 
stand the universe is a principal way of experiencing the Deity.” (Bradley.) 

2 xviii. 20-22. 1 iv. 34. 



556 


INDIAN PHILOSOPHY 


eyes, and so asked for the divine sight or spiritual vision. 1 
The visvarupa is a poetic exaggeration of the intuitional 
experience where the individual possessed by God sees all 
things in Him The Gita believes that for attaining this 
spiritual vision the individual should learn to live within and 
fix his mind on the highest reality. What hides the truth from 
our vision is not merely the fault of intellect, but also the 
passion of selfishness. Ajnana is not intellectual error, but 
spiritual blindness. To remove it we must cleanse the soul 
of the defilement of the body and the senses, and kindle the 
spiritual vision which looks at things from a new angle. The 
fire of passion and the tumult of desire must be suppressed. 1 
The mind, inconstant and unstable, must be steadied into an 
unruffled lake, that it might mirror the wisdom from above. 
Buddhi, or the power of understanding and discrimination, 
needs to be trained. 3 The way in which this power operates 
depends on our past habits. We should so train it as to bring 
it into agreement with the spiritual view of the universe. 

It is as a means of mental training that the Gita accepts 
the yoga system. The yoga discipline gives the directions 
by which we can lift ourselves from our mutable personality 
into a super-normal attitude, where we possess the key which 
is the secret of the whole play of relations. The essential 
steps of the yogic discipline are : (i) purification of mind, 
body and senses, that the divine may take possession of them; 
(2) concentration or withdrawal of the consciousness from 
the dispersed movement of thoughts running after the senses 
and fixing it on the Supreme ; and (3) identification with the 
real when we reach it. The Gita is not so very systematic 
as Patanjali’s Sutras, though the different sadhanas or 
instruments are referred to.4 

The Gita offers us certain general principles acceptable 
to thinkers of all shades of opinion. We are asked to have 
faith or sraddha,5 subdue the riotous impulses and hold fast 
in thought to God. An atmosphere of stillness and calm 
is necessary for the spiritual vision. In the silence following 


1 xi. Cf. the Prophet’s words, " Lord, open his eyes that he may see." 
See also the vision of Ezekiel and Exodus xxxiii. 18, Revelation, chap, iv, 
and Saddharma Pundarlka, chap. i. 

* iv. 39. 3 ii. 44. 4 Chap. vi. J iv. 39. 



THE THEISM OF THE BHAGAVADGITA 55? 


the firm control of the mind we can hear the voice of the soul. 
The true yoga is that which brings about spiritual impartiality, 
or samatvam. 1 “ Where the mind flickereth not like a lamp 
in a sheltered spot ; where seeing the self by the self, one 
is satisfied in himself ; where one experiences the absolute 
bliss known only to understanding, but ever beyond the senses, 
and standing where one swerves not from the truth ; where 
no other gain is considered greater, and, where placed, one 
is not moved by the greatest pain — that state free from misery 
is yoga.” * It is not necessary for all to practise yoga in 
order that they may attain the spiritual insight. Madhusu- 
dana Saras vatl quotes a verse from Vasistha : “To suppress 
mind with its egoism, etc., yoga and jnana are the two 
means. Yoga is the suppression of mental activity (vrtti- 
nirodha), and jnana is true comprehension (samyagavek- 
sanam). For some yoga is not possible, for others jnana 
is not possible.” 3 The spiritual intuition may also be helped 
by work and worship. 4 

While admitting the relevancy of the yoga discipline 
for spiritual training in some cases, the Gita is not unconscious 
of its dangers.5 By mere fasting and such other methods 
we may only weaken the powers of the senses, while our 
relish for sense-objects may be intact. What is wanted is 
control of senses and indifference to the attractions of material 
objects. This is possible only with the rise of knowledge. 

Spiritual intuition which is more perceptual in character 6 
is not uncritical conviction. It is supported by scientific 
judgment. It is a union of knowledge with austerity and 
passion, the most complete experience that we can possibly 
have, where we have no more confusion of mind, but enjoy 
true peace and rest of spirit. 7 

When once the fullness of cognitive experience is reached, 
the other sides of consciousness, emotion and will, make them- 
selves felt. The vision of God in the spiritual illumination 
is attained in an atmosphere of joy. The whole life-aspiration 
becomes one continuous adoration of the infinite. The 

* ii. 48. * vi. 19-26. 

3 Commentary on the Gita, vi. 29. 

* iv. 42. 

* Lac. 2, Pratyakijavagamam. 


J ii. 59-61. 

J iv. 35; v. 18-21. 



558 


INDIAN PHILOSOPHY 


knower is also a devotee and the best of them. 1 " He who 
knows me worships me.” 2 To know the truth is to lift up 
our hearts to the Supreme, touch Him and adore Him. 3 There 
is also a practical influence. The more profoundly we are 
conscious of our true nature, the deeper is our insight into the 
real needs of others. The good becomes " not merely the key- 
stone of knowledge, but the polestar of conduct ” in the 
famous phrase of Nettleship. We have the example of Buddha, 
the greatest jnani or seer, whose love for humanity led to his 
ministry of mankind for forty years. 

It is sometimes argued that knowledge or intelligence is 
indifferent to morality. Intelligence, it is said, is not an 
essential part of character. Intellectually we make only mis- 
takes or errors of judgment; morally we do wrong. The in- 
tellect is neither good nor bad, since it can be used to promote 
or destroy good life. All this may be true of our analytic 
understanding. Jnana, or the wisdom of the Gita, carries us 
beyond one-sided views and narrow standpoints to the compre- 
hensive truth, where we feel that the differences between men 
are not ultimate, and that no conduct which is based on 
false distinctions can be good. We see that the lives of men 
have a common root, and that a self-existent eternal spirit 
is living and operating in all individual lives. When this 
truth is perceived, sense and self lose their power.4 


X 

Bhakti Marga 

The Bhakti marga, or the path of devotion, indicates the 
law of the right activity of the emotional side of man. Bhakti 
is emotional attachment distinct from knowledge or action.5 
Through it we offer our emotional possibilities to the divine. 
Emotion expresses a living relation between individuals, 
and becomes instinct with the force of religious feeling when 
it binds God and man. If we do not love and worship, we 
become shut within the prison of our own egoism. This way, 
when rightly regulated, leads us to the perception of the 

* vii. 17. * xv. 19. J x. 8-9. 

« ii. 59. J Saijrlilya Sutras, i. 4-5 and 7. 



TIIE THEISM OF THE BHAGAVADGlTA 559 


Supreme. It is open to all, the weak and the lowly, 
the illiterate and the ignorant, 1 and is also the easiest. 
The sacrifice of love is not so difficult as the tuning of the will 
to the divine purpose or ascetic discipline, or the strenuous 
effort of thinking. It is quite as efficacious as any other 
method, and is sometimes said to be greater than others, since 
it is its own fruition, while others are means to some other end. 

The origin of the Bhakti marga is hidden in the mists of 
long ago. The upasana theory of the Upanisads and the 
devotional way of the Bhagavatas have influenced the author 
of the Gita. He struggles to develop an order of ideas be- 
longing to the religious level of the Upanisads to which they 
were not able to give free and unambiguous utterance. The 
absolute becomes in the Gita “ the understanding of them 
that understand, the splendour of the splendid,” 2 the first 
of gods and men, the chief of the rsis, as well as death which 
ravishes all. 3 Admitting that meditation of the unmanifested 
absolute leads to the goal, Krsna urges that it is a hard 
process. 4 It offers no foothold for the finite man from which 
he could approach it. The love which we feel for an object 
involves an element of separateness. However closely 
love may unite, the lover and the beloved remain distinct. 
We have to rest content with a dualism even as thought 
does ; but it is not correct to describe the monism which 
transcends the dualism as a descent to a lower grade. 
Devotion to the Supreme is possible only with a personal 
God, a concrete individual full of bliss and beauty. We 
cannot love a shadow of our minds. Personality implies 
a capacity for fellowship, or communion, or a feeling together. 
There is the personal need for a personal helper. So God, 
into whose being the heart of love enters, is not the God who 
revels in bloodshed, not one who sleeps in serene abstraction 
while hearts heavy-laden cry out for help. He is love.5 
He who gives up his whole to God and falls at His feet finds 
the gates of spirit lie open. The voice of God declares, 
“ This is My word of promise, that he who loveth Me shall 
not perish.” 6 


• ix. 32; see also xi. 53-54. 
3 X. 20-25. 3.4 
( $aranagatavatsala^. 


1 vii. 10. 
4 xii. 5. 

‘ ix. 31. 



560 


INDIAN PHILOSOPHY 


It is not a rigid law of recompense that binds God to the 
world. The consequences of deeds may be averted by means 
of devotion to God. This is no supersession of the law of 
karma, since the law requires that even devotion should have 
its reward. Krsna says : “ Even if a man of evil conduct 
turns to me with a sole and entire love, he must be regarded 
as a saint,” because he has turned to God with a settled will, 
and has therefore become a soul of righteousness. The Lord 
by Himself does not receive the sin or the merit of any. 1 
Yet He has so arranged the scheme of things, that nothing 
happens without producing its effect. In a sense it is true 
that “ the Lord enjoys all sacrifices and penances.” It is 
in this way that we have to reconcile apparently contradictory 
views expressed in passages like “ none is hateful to Me and 
none dear,” and “ the devotees are dear to Me.” 2 Man is 
the object of God’s constant care. 

The nature of love towards God or bhakti is indescribable 
even “ as the taste of the dumb person.” 3 The essential 
features of this emotional attachment may, however, be 
stated. There is the adoration of something looked upon 
as absolutely perfect. Since the object is perfection, nothing 
less than the highest conceivable will do. N jlrada in his 
sutras brings in the analogy of human love, 4 where also the 
finite individual transcends himself and reaches out towards 
an ideal. Only the ideal very frequently reveals its actual 
nature The object of devotion is the highest being, or Puru- 
sottama. He is the illuminator of souls as well as the 
vivifier of the world. God is not to be identified with the 
different elements which seem to be the ultimate realities at a 
lower level, nor is He the lord of sacrifices as the MImamsakas 
imagine. He is not to be confused with the several personal 
agencies which the mind of man attributes to the natural 
forces. He is not the purusa of the Samkhyas. He is all 
these and more. 5 The author of the Gita emphasises how God 
lives in each individual. If the Supreme were quite foreign 
to the individual consciousness, He could not be an object 
of worship ; if He were absolutely identical with the individual, 
even then worship is not possible. He is partly the same as 

• ix. ; v. 15. » ix. 29 ; xii. 14-20 ; see also xvi. 16. 

1 Narada Sutras, 51-52. 1 Ibid,, 23. 5 viii. 4. 



THE THEISM OF THE BHAGAVADGlTA 561 


and partly different from the individual. He is the divine 
Lord associated with prakrti or Laksmi, in whose hands lies 
the treasure of desirable things. The prospect of union with 
Him is a vision of delight. “ Fix thy mind in Me, into Me 
let thy understanding enter ; thou shalt surely live with 
Me alone hereafter.” z All other love is only an imperfect 
manifestation of this supreme love. We love other things 
for the sake of the eternal in them. The devotee has 
a sense of utter humiliation. In the presence of the 
ideal he feels that he is nothing, and such an utter 
prostration of the self is the indispensable pre-requisite 
of true religious devotion. God loves meekness. 2 The in- 
dividual feels himself to be worthless apart from God. His 
devotion expresses itself as either love for God (prlti), 
or misery due to the absence of God (viraha). The self 
cannot but reject itself as worthless dross when it discovers 
the supreme value of the object to which it attaches itself. 
The devotee throws himself entirely on the mercy of God. 
Absolute dependence is the only way. “ Merge thy mind 
in Me, be My devotee, prostrate thyself before Me, thou shalt 
come even unto Me. I pledge thee My troth, thou art dear 
to Me. Abandoning all dharmas, come unto Me alone for 
shelter ; sorrow not, I will liberate thee from all sins.” 3 God 
insists on undivided devotion, and assures us that He will 
take up our knowledge and our error and cast away all 
forms of insufficiency and transform all into His infinite 
light and the purity of the universal good. Again, there 

is the continual desire to serve the ideal. The devotee 

“looks only on the object of his devotion, talks only 
about Him and thinks only of Him.” t Whatever he 
does he does for the glory of God. His work is absolutely 
unselfish, since it is indifferent to its fruits. It is an utter 
self-giving to the transcendent. 5 When the devotee surrenders 
himself completely into the hands of the ideal, we do not have 
a blind intensity of feeling. It is an open-armed surrender 
in which feeling is displaced by life. God becomes the ruling 
passion of the mind. The devotee reaches his end, becomes 
immortal and satisfied in himself. He does not desire any- 


1 xii. 8. 

3 B.G., xviii. 64-66. 


* Narada Sutras, 27, dainyaprivatvam. 
4 Narada Sutras, 55. 5 B.G., ix. 28. 



562 


INDIAN PHILOSOPHY 


thing, sorrows not ; he is filled with joy and peace — rapt 
in the spirit. 1 Bhakti, or true devotion, according to the Gita, 
is to believe in God, to love Him, to be devoted to Him and 
to enter into Him. It is its own reward. 

For the true bhakti, we require first of all SraddhS. or faith. 
The highest reality has to be assumed or taken on faith till 
it reveals itself in the devotee’s consciousness.* Since faith 
is a vital element, the gods in whom the people have faith are 
tolerated. In view of the unlimited variety of the habits 
and minds of men, liberty of thought and worship is allowed 
to the individual. Some love is better than none, for if 
we do not love, we become shut up within ourselves. The 
infinite presents itself to the human soul in a variety of aspects. 
The lower gods are forms or aspects of the one Supreme. The 
Gita ranks the avatars of the divine as lower than Purusot- 
tama ; Brahma, Visnu and Siva, if they are not names for 
the Supreme acting as creator, preserver and destroyer, 
are also subordinated to Purusottama.3 The worship of 
Vedic gods is admitted.t Out of a feeling of pity, the 
Gita allows freedom to the multitudes worshipping ksudra 
devatas or petty divinities. So long as worship is done with 
devotion it purifies the heart and prepares the mind for the 
higher consciousness. 5 

The philosophical justification of this tolerant attitude 
is suggested though not worked out. A man is what his 
thoughts are. Whatever he has faith in, that he will 
attain to. The world is a purposive moral order, where 
the individual obtains what he desires. “ Those who make 
vows to the gods go to the gods ; those who make vows to 
manes go to them.” 6 “ Whichever form any worshipper 

wishes to worship with faith, to that form I render his faith 
steady. Possessed of that faith, he seeks to propitiate that 
deity, and obtains from it those beneficial things which are 
really given by Me.” 7 As Ramanuja observes: “From 
Brahma to a reed, all things that live in the world are subject 
to birth and death caused by karma, therefore they cannot 
be helpful as objects of meditation.” Only the true Lord 

» Narada Sutras, 4-7. Mattah, stabdhati, atmaramah. 

* iv. 40. 3 xi. 37. 4 ix. 23. 5 vii. 21-23. 

* ix, 25 ; see also xvii. 3. 7 vii. 20-21. 



THE THEISM OF THE BHAGAVADGlTA 563 


Purusottama can serve as the object of devotion. The 
lower forms are stepping-stones to it. In chapter x we are 
called upon to fix our mind on particular objects and persons 
displaying power and grandeur to an extraordinary degree. 
This is called pratlka upasana. In chapter xi the whole 
universe assumes the form of God. In chapter xii we dwell 
on the presiding God. Only the highest can give us freedom. 
Other devotees reach finite ends, while the devotees of the 
Supreme reach infinite bliss. 1 

The forms which bhakti takes are contemplation of God’s 
power, wisdom and goodness, constant remembrance of Him 
with a devout heart, conversing about His qualities with other 
persons, singing His praises with fellow-men and doing all 
acts as His service. 2 No fixed rules can be laid down. By 
these different movements the human soul draws near to the 
divine. Several symbols and disciplines are devised to train 
the mind to turn godward. Absolute devotion to God is 
not possible unless we give up our desires for sense-objects. 
So yoga is sometimes adopted. 3 The impulse may take any 
form of adoration, from external worship to a periodical 
reminder to free us from the preoccupations of life. The 
Gita asks us sometimes to think of God, excluding all other 
objects. This is a negative method. 4 It also requires us to 
look upon the whole world as a supreme manifestation of 
God. 5 We have to realise God in nature and self, and so 
regulate our conduct as to make it expressive of the divine 
in man. Supreme devotion and complete self-surrender, or 
bhakti and prapatti, are the different sides of the one fact. 
The Gita recognises that the one infinite God can be 
approached and worshipped through any of His aspects. 
This tolerant spirit has made Hinduism a synthesis of 
different kinds of worship and experience, an atmosphere 
unifying many cults and creeds, a system of thought or 
a spiritual culture based on the fact that the one truth has 
many sides. 

In the highest fulfilment of devotion, we possess a sense 

' Anto brahmadibhaktanam madbhaktanam anantata. . . . Madhva’» 
commentary on the Gita, vii. 21. 

* Narada Sutras, 16-18. 

♦ B.G., xviii. 73. 


i Ibid, 47-49.. 

5 Chaps vi and xi. 



564 


INDIAN PHILOSOPHY 


of certitude about the obj ect . The experience is self-certifying 
in character. It is its own proof, svayam pramanam. 
Logical discussions are not of much avail. The true devotees 
do not worry about vain discussions concerning God. 1 This 
is the highest kind of bhakti, from which there is no transition 
to anything else. It is devotion that is constant, mrantara, 
unmotived nirhetuka* Few there are who are willing to serve 
God for naught. The Gita has not the weakness of emotional 
religions which deny knowledge and will for the sake of love. 
While all devotees are dear to the Lord, the possesser of wisdom 
is the dearest of all. 3 The other three classes of devotees, 
the suffering, the seeker of knowledge and the selfish, may have 
petty aims and cease to love God when their desires are 
fulfilled, but the seer worships Him ever in purity of spirit . * 
Bhakti, or intense love for God, becomes then a fire, scorching, 
burning and consuming all limits of individuality. The 
vision of truth is revealed. Without this restraint of the 
spiritual truth, the Gita religion might lapse into emotionalism, 
and devotion itself might become a mere carnival of feeling. 

What begins as quiet prayer, a longing for the sight of 
the beloved, ends in an irresistible rapture of love and delight. 
The worshipper becomes incorporate with God’s being. 
He feels the force of the truth of the oneness of God in the 
universe. " Vasudevah sarvam iti.” He escapes from the 
loneliness of life and the insignificance of a world where he 
was a mere particular to one where he becomes the instrument 
of the central Spirit. 5 The largest human personality is 
only a partial expression of it. The genuine nature of each 
individual is the eternal spirit revealing itself in time and 
space. Knowledge and devotion become interdependent. 6 
True devotion issues in unselfish conduct. The devotee is 
consumed by an all-embracing beneficent love that seeks not 
its own or any return for its overflowing. It is like the divine 
love that brought the universe into being, maintains it and 
lifts it up to itself. Not the devotee but the power of spirit 
acts in him in a divine freedom. Absolute self-surrender and 

> Narada Sutras, 58 and 75. 

* B.G., vii. 17-18 ; viii. 14-22 ; Bhagavata, iii. 29-12. 

5 vii. 17. 4 xviii. 5. 

I B.G., xviii. 46 ; vii. 19 ; viii. 7. * Narada Sutras, 28-29. 



THE THEISM OF THE BHAGAVADGITA 565 


the dedication of all work to God mark the conduct of the true 
devotee. He has thus in him the content of the highest 
philosophy as well as the energy of the perfect man. Though 
here and there we come across passionate souls who do not 
worry about the affairs of the world, still the ideal devotee 
of the Gita is one in whom love is lighted up by knowledge 
and bursts forth into a fierce desire to suffer for mankind. 
Tilak quotes a &loka from Visnu Purana, which says : “ Those 
who give up their duties and sit down uttering the name 
Krsna, Krsna, are really the enemies of God and sinners. 
Even the Lord took birth in the world for the sake of righteous- 
ness.” 1 

It is obvious that for those who insist on devotion as the 
final nature of spiritual life, the end is not an immersion in 
the eternal impersonal, but a union with the Purushottama. 
The Gita, however, recognises nirguna bhakti, or devotion to 
the qualityless, as superior to all else. Then the absolute 
becomes the most ultimate category. 2 When devotion is 
perfected, then the individual and his God become suffused 
into one spiritual ecstasy, and reveal themselves as aspects 
of one life. Absolute monism is therefore the completion of 
the dualism with which the devotional consciousness starts. 


XI 

Karma Marga 

Through divine service or karma we can also reach the 
highest. Karma is act or deed, even that by which the 
impersonal becomes personal. 3 Karma is said to be beginning- 
less, and the exact manner by which the work of the world 
proceeds is hard to understand. 4 At the end of creation the 
whole world is said to lie in the form of a subtle karma seed 
ready to sprout again at the next start. 5 Since the world 
process is dependent upon the Lord, we can call Him the 
lord of karma. 6 We are committed to some action or other. 

■ See B.G., ix. 30; cf. 1 John ii. 9-1 1, iv. 18-20. 

* See Bhagavata, iii. 29; vii. 14. 

1 vii. 24-25. « iv. 17. 

1 viii. 18-19. ‘ vii. 22. 



56G INDIAN PHILOSOPHY 

It is necessary to see to it that our conduct promotes the 
interests of righteousness, which at the same time results in 
spiritual rest and satisfaction. Karma marga is the path 
of conduct by which the individual thirsting for service can 
reach the goal. 

At the time of the Gita many different views of right 
conduct prevailed, viz. the Vedic theory of the observance 
of rites and ceremonies, the Upanisad doctrine of a search 
after truth, the Buddhistic idea of the giving up of all actions 
and the theistic view of the worship of God. The Gita tries 
to round them all into a consistent system. 

The Gita recognises that it is through work that we are 
brought into relation with the rest of the world. The problem 
of morality has significance only in the human world. The 
self of man alone of the objects of the world possesses a sense 
of responsibility. The individual aspires after spiritual happi- 
ness, but he cannot derive it from the material elements of 
the world. The pleasure which he strives after is of different 
kinds. What is derived from a deluded mind and false 
desires has more of tamas in it ; what is derived from the 
senses has more of rajas, and the pleasure of self-knowledge 
has more of sattva in it . 1 The highest satisfaction can 
come only when the individual ceases to look upon himself 
as an independent agent and feels that God in His infinite 
grace guides the world. The spirit in man is satisfied if it 
sees the spirit in the world . 2 Good work is that which helps 
us to the liberation of the individual and the perfection of 
spirit. 

Right conduct is whatever expresses our real unity with 
God, man, and nature ; wrong conduct is whatever does not 
bring out this essential structure of reality. The unity of 
the universe is the basic principle. Good is whatever 
advances towards completeness, and evil is whatever is 
inconsistent with it. This is the essential difference between 
Buddhism and the Gita. Buddhism no doubt made morality 
central to the good life, but it did not sufficiently emphasise 
the relation of moral life to spiritual perfection or the purpose 
of the universe. In the Gita we are assured that even though 

1 ii. 71 ; vi. 22. 15. 2S ; xii. 12 ; xvii. 6a ; xviii. 36-38. 

• Plato: Republic, ix. 



THE THEISM OF THE BIIAGAVADGITA 5G7 


we may fail in our efforts, the central divine purpose can never 
be destroyed. It points out that the soul of the world is 
just, in spite of all appearances to the contrary. The 
individual fulfils his destiny when he becomes the instrument 
of the increasing purpose of God. 

The finite centres should look upon themselves as members 
of an organism and work for the sake of the whole. The 
false claim to absoluteness and the wrong view that his 
independence is limited by that of others should be abandoned. 
The true ideal is lokasamgraha, or the solidarity of the world. 
The spirit of the whole works in the world. The good man 
should co-operate with it and aim at the welfare of the world. 1 
The Gita repudiates the notion of individual claims. The 
best people have the largest burdens to bear. The venture 
of finite beings implies evil that has to be overcome. We 
cannot shrink from the task of fighting sin and injustice. 
The hesitating Arjuna was persuaded by Kr$na to fight, 
not for love of glory or lust of kingdom, but for the sake of the 
law of righteousness ; but when we fight injustice we should 
do so, not in passion or ignorance which brings grief and 
disquiet, but in knowledge and with love for all. 1 

Sense control becomes a characteristic of the good man. 
Passion imprisons our spiritual nature. It deadens discretion 
and fetters reason. To give full rein to the untamed impulses 
is to enslave the soul dwelling in the body.3 The Gita requires 
us to develop a spirit of detachment and indifference to the 
results of action, the spirit of yoga, or impartiality. 4 True 
renunciation consists in this. Giving up acts out of ignorance 
is tyaga mixed with tamas ; giving up acts out of fear of 
consequences such as bodily suffering is tyaga with rajas 
in it ; doing work in a spirit of detachment without fear 
of consequences is the best form, since it has more of sattva 
in it. 5 

It is necessary to understand the exact bearing of 
the Gita on the question of work. It does not support 
an ascetic ethics. The Buddhistic theory of inaction is 
interpreted in a more positive way. True inaction is action 
without any hope of reward. Analysing the nature of tha 

1 v. 25 ; xii. 4. * xi. 55, J vi. 46 ; viii. 27. 

4 vi. 46; viii. 27. 5 xvii. 7-9, 11-12. 



568 


INDIAN PHILOSOPHY 


act of karma, the Gita distinguishes the mental antecedents 
from the outer deed, and calls upon us to control the former 
by suppressing all selfishness. 1 Naiskarmya, or abstention 
from action, is not the true law of morality, but niskamata, 
or disinterestedness. 1 * * * Passion, anger and covetousness, the 
three ways to hell, are to be overcome. 3 All desires are not 
bad. The desire after righteousness is divine. 4 The Gita, 
instead of demanding a rooting out of our passions, asks for 
a purifying of them. The physical-vital nature is to be 
cleansed, the mental-intellectual nature is to be purified, 
and then the spiritual nature finds its satisfaction. 5 The 
Gita is certain that inertia is not liberty. “ Nor indeed 
can embodied beings completely relinquish action.” 6 

The eye cannot choose but see, 

We cannot bid the ear be still, 

Our bodies feel where’er they be 
Against of with our will. 7 

Rest is not on earth ; it is all life for ever. Work keeps up 
the circuit of the world, and each individual should try his 
best to keep it going. 8 The whole setting of the Gita points 
out that it is an exhortation to action. Work is inevitable 
till we attain freedom. We have to work for the sake of 
freedom, and when we attain it, we have to work as instru- 
ments of the divine. Then, of course, there is no more work 
necessary for preparing the mind or purifying the heart. 
The freed souls have no rules to obey, they do what they 
please, but the vital point is they do something.9 

The Gita asks us to act in a way when action does not 
bind. The Lord Himself acts for the sake of humanity. 
Though from the absolute standpoint He is self-contained 
and desireless, He has always something to accomplish in 
the world. Even so is Arjuna asked to fight and do his work. 
The free souls have also the obligation to help others to 

1 xviii. 18. * v. ii ; xviii. 49. 

3 ii. 62-63; x vi. 21. * vii. 11. 

5 Pusfi, tusfi and santi are the respective ideals of the vital, the in- 

tellectual and the spiritual sides of human nature. 

6 xviii. 11. 7 Wordsworth. 

8 iii. 10 16. 3 Brh. Up., yi. 4. 22 ; S.B., iii. 32. 



THE THEISM OF THE BHAGAYADGlTA 569 


discover the divine in themselves. Service of humanity is 
worship of God. 1 To work desirelessly and impersonally 
for the sake of the world and God does not bind us. “Nor 
do these works bind Me, enthroned on high, unattached to 
actions.” 1 * * The Gita draws a distinction between sannyasa 
and tyaga : “ Sannyasa is renouncing all interested works ; 
tyaga is giving up the fruit of all work.” 3 The latter is more 
comprehensive. The Gita does not ask us to abhor the 
common business of life, but demands the suppression of all 
selfish desires. It is a combination of pravrtti, or work, and 
nivrtti, or withdrawal, that the Gita upholds. Mere with- 
drawal is not true renunciation. The hands may be at rest, 
but the desires may be busy. What binds is not work, but 
the spirit in which it is done. “ The giving up of karmas by 
the ignorant is really a positive act ; the work of the wise 
is really inaction.” 4 The inner life of spirit is compatible 
with active life in the world. The Gita reconciles the two 
in the spirit of the Upanisads. Action in the way indicated 
by the Gita is skilled action. “ Yogah karmasu kausalam,” 
yoga is skill in works. 5 

Whatever we do has to be done not in subjection to an 
external law, but in obedience to the inner determination 
of the soul’s freedom. This is the highest kind of action. 
Aristotle says : “ He is best who acts on his own convictions, 
while he is second best who acts in obedience to the counsel 
of others.” 6 To the unregenerate the scriptures are the 
authority. The injunctions of the Vedas are only external, 
and do not bind us when we reach the highest condition, 
where we act naturally in accordance with the law of 
spirit. 

All work has to be done in purity of motive. We have 
to exclude from our minds subtle shades of selfishness, pre- 
ferences for special forms of work, desire for sympathy and 
applause. Good karma, if it is to purify the mind and lead us 
to wisdom, should be performed in this spirit. The selfish 
egoist who looks upon himself as a god on earth and hunts 

1 xviii. 46. * ix. 9 ; iv. 13-14. 

3 xviii. 2. 4 Astavakraglta, xviii. 61. 

5 ii. 50, 48 ; iii. 3 ; iv. 42 ; vi. 33, 46. 

* Ethics, i. 4. 7. 



570 


INDIAN PHILOSOPHY 


after sense-pleasures is a demon adopting materialism in 
metaphysics and sensualism in ethics. 1 

The theory of the gunas or qualities plays an important 
part in the Gita ethics. 2 The bondage to gunas causes the 
feeling of limitedness. The bonds belonging to mind are 
erroneously attributed to the self. Though action saturated 
with sattva is said to be the best kind of action, 3 it is also 
urged that even sattva binds, since a nobler desire brings 
about a purer ego. For full freedom all egoism should cease. 
The ego, however pure it may be, is an obstructing veil 
and binds itself to knowledge and bliss. Getting beyond all 
qualities and occupying an impersonal cosmic outlook form 
the ideal state.4 e 

The Gita transforms the Vedic theory of sacrifices and 
reconciles it with true spiritual knowledge.5 The outer gift 
is a symbol of the inner spirit. The sacrifices are attempts 
to develop self-restraint and self-surrender. The true 
sacrifice is the sacrifice of the sense delights. The god to 
whom w'e offer is the great Supreme, or the Yajna Purusa, 
the lord of sacrifices. 6 We have to feel that all objects 
are divinely appointed means for the realisation of the highest 
ends and engage ourselves in work, resigning it all to God. 
Whether we eat or drink or whatsoever we do we should do 
all to the glory of God. A yogin always acts in God, and 
his conduct becomes a model for imitation by others.7 
The Gita lays down several general principles for the 
regulation of human conduct. The golden mean is advised 
in some passages. 8 The Gita recognises the caste 
divisions as well as the theory of the stages of life. 
Men on a lower level of feeling and thought cannot all 
of a sudden be lifted up into a higher state. The 
humanising process takes a long time, sometimes several 
generations. The Gita broadly distinguishes four funda- 
mental types of individuals answ'ering to the four stages 
of the upward ascent. Basing caste on qualities, 9 the Gita 
requires each individual to do the duties imposed by his 


* xvi. 8, 42. 
« xiv. 19. 

7 iii. 21. 


• xiv. 5. 9 xviii. 23. 

5 iv. 24-27. 6 iv. 33. 

1 vi. 16-17. J iv. 13. 



THE THEISM OF THE BHAGAVADGlTA 571 


caste. 1 Svadharma is the work in agreement with the law 
of one’s being. We worship God by doing our ordained 
duties. 2 God intends every man for some work in connexion 
with society. The constitution of the social order is said 
to be divine. Plato supports an analogous doctrine. “ The 
ruler of the universe has ordered all things with a view to the 
excellence and preservation of the whole, and each part, as 
far as may be, has an action and passion appropriate to it 
. . . for every physician and every skilled artist does all things 
for the sake of the whole, directing this effort toward the 
common good, executing the part for the sake of the 
whole, and not the whole for the sake of the part.” 3 
Though originally framed on the basis of qualities, caste 
very soon became a matter of birth. It is hard to know who 
has which qualities. The only available test is birth. The 
confusion of birth and qualities has led to an undermining 
of the spiritual foundation of caste. There is no necessity 
why men of a particular birth should always possess the 
character expected of them. Since the facts of life do not 
answer to the logical ideal, the whole institution of caste 
is breaking down. While it is easy to condemn the system 
from our present-day knowledge, we have to recognise in 
fairness to it that it attempted to build a society on a basis 
of mutual goodwill and co-operation and remedy the dangers 
of a competitive view of society. It recognised the supremacy 
not of w'ealth, but of w’isdom, and its judgment of values 
is correct. 

The last of the four stages is that of sannyasa, where 
the individual is called upon to withdraw from life, t 
This stage, it is sometimes said, is to be entered on when 
the body is shrinking and the subject feels unfit for work. 5 
True sannyasa is the giving up of selfish desires, and this is 
possible even while we live as householders. 6 It is not 
right to say that, in the view of the Gita, we cannot attain 
moksa or freedom unless we resort to the last stage of 
sannyasa. 

Action performed in the spirit indicated by the Gita 

1 ii. 3i. > xviii. 46-47. 5 Laws, x. 903B. Jowett's version. 

< Mann, vi. 33-37; M.B., 6anti parva, 241. 15; 244. 3. 

5 Manu, vi. 2 ; M.B., Udyogaparva, 36. 39. ‘ B.G., v. 3. 

19 


VC I. x 



572 INDIAN PHILOSOPHY 

finds its completion in wisdom. 1 Egoism is eliminated and 
a sense of the divine is kindled. If we do the will we shall 
know of the doctrine. In that stage there is also a heart- 
felt devotion to the divine. Thus karma marga leads us to a 
condition where emotion, knowledge and will are all present. 

From our account it is clear that the path of service leads 
to moksa ; only it is not karma in the sense of the Purva 
Mimarhsa. Vedic sacrifices do not lead us to freedom. They 
have only an instrumental use. They prepare the mind for 
higher wisdom. But karma performed as a sacrifice to God, 
and in a spirit of disinterestedness and impersonality, is 
quite as efficacious as any other method, and there is no need 
to subordinate it to the method of wisdom as fsamkara does, 
or that of devotion as Ramanuja believes. In the interests 
of their own views, they make out that it was only to flatter 
Arjuna and coax him into action that Krsna declares 
the path of karma to be superior. 2 * We cannot suppose that 
Arjuna was called upon to act with a lie in his soul. Nor is 
he an ajnanin who has to work for the sake of purifying his 
mind and heart. It is not possible for us to look upon Janaka, 
Krsna and others as persons who indulge in works because 
they are men of imperfect wisdom. Nor is there need to 
think that after attaining wisdom there is no possibility for 
work. Janaka says that the true preaching was declared 
to him, which was to do karma, after killing selfish desires 
by wisdom. Even Samkara allows that after the attainment 
of wisdom some karmas are necessary to sustain the body. 3 
If some acts are allowed, it is only a question of degree how 
much the freed soul does. If the individual is afraid of 
becoming once again subject to karma, it means that his 
sense-control is not perfect.4 Even if we believe that as 
Brahman is different from the world, so is Atman from the 
body, there is nothing to prevent the body from performing 
acts. 5 The Gita, however, admits that men are of different 
temperaments, and some are inclined to withdrawal and 
others to service, and they will have to act according to 
the law of their own being. 6 

1 Chap. iv. » S.B.G., v. 2 ; vi 1-2 ; xviii. 11 ; R.B.G., v. 1 ; iii. 1. 

3 in. 8 . * xviii. 7; iii. 6. 5 iv. 21 ; v. 12. 

6 M.B_ Santiparva, 339-340. 



THE THEISM OF THE BHAGAVADGlTA 573 


Before we pass from this section it is necessary to note 
the views of the Gita on the question of human freedom. 
The will of man seems to be determined by past nature, 
heredity, training and environment. The whole world seems 
to converge in the nature of the individual. Except indirectly, 
the determination by nature cannot be called an ordinance 
of God. “ All existences follow their nature, and what shall 
coercing it avail ? ” 1 Human effort seems to be vain, 
since God in the centre of things seems to whirl all 
individuals " as if mounted on a machine.” 1 If the 
will determined by nature were all, there is no human 
freedom. The Buddhists declare that there is no self, 
but only karma acts. The Gita recognises a soul superior 
to the mechanically determined will. Whatever may be the 
truth of the ultimate state of the soul, when freed from 
bondage to nature, at the moral level it has a separate 
independent existence. The Gita believes in human freedom. 
Krsna, after describing the whole philosophy of life, asks 
Arjuna to “do as he chooses.” 3 There is no omnipotence 
of nature over the human soul. We are not obliged to follow 
the dictates of nature. We are actually warned against 
our likes and dislikes, which are “ the besetters of the soul in 
its path.” A distinction is made between what is inevitable 
in the make-up of nature which we cannot suppress and those 
wanderings and confusions which we can get rid of. Those 
beings whose souls have not struggled to the surface are driven 
by the current of nature. Human individuals in whom 
intelligence predominates check the process of nature. They 
refer all activities to the intelligent will. They do not lead 
unexamined animal lives, unless they are dominated by 
passion. “ What propels a man to sin, often seemingly 
against his will, and as if constrained by some secret force ? ” 
The answer is given that “ it is lust, which instigates him 
• • . it is the enemy of man on earth.” 4 It is possible for 
the individual to control his passion and regulate his conduct 
by reason. Samkara writes : “ As regards all sense-objects, 
such as sounds, there necessarily arises in each sense love 
for an agreeable object, and aversion to a disagreeable object. 

1 xviii. 59-60 ; see also iii. 33, 36. * xviii. 61. 

> Yathecchasi tatha kuru, xviii. 63. « iii. 37 ; vi 5-6. 



574 


INDIAN PHILOSOPHY 


Now I shall tell you where lies the scope for personal exertion 
and for the teaching of the sastras. He who would follow 
the teaching should at the very commencement rise above the 
sway of affection and aversion.” 1 Karma is only a condition 
and not a destiny. This follows even from the Gita analysis 
of the act where fate is only one of five factors. For the 
accomplishment of any act, five elements are necessary. 
They are adhisthana, or basis, some centre from which to 
work; kartr, or a doer; karana, or the instrumentation of 
nature ; cesta, or effort ; and daiva, or fate. This last is 
the power or powers other than human, the cosmic principle 
which stands behind modifying the work and disposing of 
its fruits in the shape of act and its reward. 


XII 

Moksa 

Whatever be the method we pursue, wisdom, love or 
service, the end reached is the same, union of the soul with 
the highest. When the mind is purified and egoism is 
destroyed, the individual becomes one with the supreme. 
If we start with the service of man, we end by becoming one 
with the supreme, not merely in work and consciousness, 
but in life and being. Love culminates in the ecstasy of 
devotion, where soul and God become one. Whatever route 
we approach by, we end in seeing, experiencing and living 
the divine life. This is the highest form of religion or life 
of spirit, called jnana in the wider sense of the term. 

Jnana as the method of attaining spiritual reality is 
distinct from jnana as the spiritual intuition, which is the 
ideal. Samkara correctly observes that moksa, or direct 
perception of God, is not an act of service or devotion, or for 
that matter cognition, however much it may be led up to 
by it. It is an experience or a direct insight into truth. 
It is to attain God that the different paths are tried. The 
Gita is not wholly consistent in its evaluation of the different 
routes to reality. “ Try to know Me. If you cannot 
contemplate Me, practise yoga. If you are not equal to 

* S.B.G., iii. 34. 



THE THEISM OF THE BHAGAVADGlTA 575 


this, try to serve Me by dedicating all your work to Me. 
If even this is found hard, do your duty regardless of conse- 
quences, giving up all desire for fruits.” 1 Again : “ Better 
indeed is wisdom than constant practice ; meditation is 
better than wisdom ; renouncing the fruit of action is better 
than meditation ; on renunciation follows peace.” * Each 
of the methods is preferred sometime or other. 3 In the mind 
of the author any method will do, and what the method is 
is left to the individual’s choice. “ Some by meditation, 
others by reflection, others by action, others by worship . . 
pass beyond death.” 4 

The supreme experience is freedom, and the word jnana 
is employed to refer to both the goal of the adventure as 
well as the path leading to it. On account of this confusion 
some have been led to think that jnana as a path is superior 
to the other methods of approach, and that cognition alone 
persists, while the other elements of emotion and will fall out 
in the supreme state of freedom. There does not seem to 
be any justification for such an opinion. 

Freedom or mok£a is unity with the supreme self. It 
is called by different names : mukti, or release ; brahmi sthiti 
being in Brahman, naiskarmya, or non-action ; nistraigunya, 
or the absence of the three qualities ; kaivalya, or solitary 
salvation ; brahmabhava, or the being of Brahman. In 
the absolute experience there is a feeling of the oneness 
of all. “ The Atman is in all beings, and all beings 
are in the Atman.” 5 The state of perfection exceeds 
the fruits of righteousness, resulting from the observance 
of Vedic rites, performances of sacrifices and all other 
methods. 6 

We have already said that different interpretations are 
given as to the place of work in the ultimate condition. 
The Gita is not clear on the point whether there is any basis 
of individuality in the ultimate state. The final condition is 
called siddhi, or perfection ; para siddhi, or supreme perfection ; 
paramgatim, or the supreme goal ; "padamanamayam,” or the 
blissful seat ; santi, or quietude ; “ £a£vatam padam avyayam,” 


* xii. 9-i i. 

J vi. 46 ; vii. 16 ; xii. 12. 
I vi. 29. 


• xii. 12. 

4 xiii. 24-25 ; xviii 54-56. 

* viii. 28. 



576 INDIAN PHILOSOPHY 

the eternal indestructible abode . 1 These expressions are 
colourless, and do not tell us whether there is a continuance of 
individuality in the state of freedom. There are texts which 
assert that the released are not troubled about the concerns 
of the world. They have no individuality, and therefore 
no basis for action. Duality disappears and work becomes 
impossible. The freed man has no qualities. He becomes 
one with the eternal self . 2 If prakrti acts, and if the eternal 
is independent of the modes of prakrti’s workings, then in 
the state of moksa there is no ego, no will, no desire. It 
is a condition beyond all modes and qualities, impassive, 
free and at peace. It is not mere survival of death, but 
the attaining of the supreme state of being, where the spirit 
knows itself to be superior to birth and death, infinite, 
eternal, and unconditioned by manifestations. Samkara 
takes his stand on these passages and interprets the freedom 
of the Gita in the sense of the kaiyalya of the Samkyhas. 
If we have a body clinging to us, nature will go on acting till 
the body is shaken off as a discarded shell. The impersonal 
spirit is detached from the workings of the body. Even 
Samkara recognises that there will be life and action so long 
as there is the body. We cannot escape from the instru- 
mentalism of nature. The Jivanmukta, or the freed soul, 
possessing the body, reacts to the events of the outer world, 
though he does not get entangled in them. There is no 
suggestion of the transformation of the whole nature into the 
immortal dharma, the law of the infinite power of the divine. 
Spirit and body are an unreconciled duality, and the spirit can 
attain its perfection only when the sense of the reality of the 
body is shaken off. On this view we cannot think of the action 
of the highest Brahman, since the basis of all activity, the 
unstable formation in the bosom of the infinite, the temporary 
phenomenon is dissolved. A perfect relinquishment of our 
point of view seems to be the end of all progress. Samkara is 
emphatic that our view of the infinite is not its true measure. 
The fullness of its life cannot be comprehended by us from our 

i xii. io ; xvi. 23 ; xiv. 1 ; vi 45 ; viii. 13 ; ix. 32 ; xvi 22-23 ; ii. 
51 ; iv. 39 ; v. 12 ; xvni. 62 ; xvni 56. 

» Atmaiva, vii. 18. He obtains my nature, madbhavam yati, viii. 5 ; 
see also viii. 7. 



THE THEISM OF THE BHAGAVADGlTA 577 


human standpoint. Adopting this view, he urges that those 
verses of the Gita which imply the plurality of spirits do not 
refer to the ultimate state, but only to relative conditions. 

We have other verses which suggest that action is possible 
even for the freed souls. The men of insight and wisdom 
imitate the supreme Lord and act in the world. 1 The highest 
condition is not a laya or a disappearance in the supreme, 
but one of individuality. The freed spirit, though centred 
in impersonality, possesses its own individuality as a part 
of the divine soul. Even as Purusottama, who has the whole 
universe suffused through His being, acts, the liberated 
individuals should act. The highest state is one of dwelling 
in Purusottama. 2 * * Those who have attained it are freed 
from rebirth and attain to the status of God .3 Release 
is not obliteration of individuality for all eternity, 
but a state of blissful freedom of the soul with a distinct 
existence in the presence of God. “ My devotees come 
to me.” 4 The author of the Gita seems to believe in a 
continuance of conscious individuality even in freedom. As 
a matter of fact, some passages suggest that the freed do not 
become God, but only attain sameness of essence with God . 5 
Freedom is not pure identity, but only qualitative sameness, 
an elevation of the soul to God-like existence, where petty 
desires have no power to move. To be immortal is to live 
in the eternal light. We do not cease to be selves, but 
deepen our selfhood, efface all stains of sin, cut asunder the 
knot of doubt, master ourselves, and are ever engaged in doing 
good to all creatures. We do not free ourselves from all 
qualities, but possess the sattva quality and suppress the 
rajas. 6 Ramanuja insists on this view, and makes out that 
the freed soul is in constant union (nityayukta) with God, 
and his whole life and being reveal it. Knowledge streams 
from the light in which he lives, and in his love for God he 
is practically lost. We seem to possess here a supreme 
existence attained not by a total exclusion of nature, but 
by a higher spiritual fulfilment of it. On this view we act 

1 iv. 14-15. * Nivasisyasi mayyeva. 

3 xviii. 21 ; iv. 10. Madbhfivam agatah. 

♦ vii. 23 ; see also ix. 25 ; iv. 9. 

5 xiv. 2. Mama sadharmyam agatah. L ^aiitarajasam, vi. 27 



578 INDIAN PHILOSOPHY 

and live in God ; only the centre of activity shifts from the 
human self to the divine. The divine energy is felt to be 
pulsating through the whole world, taking different forms 
in different things. Each soul has its centre and circum- 
ference in God. The view of Ramanuja holds to the truth 
of spiritual personality as a factor even in the highest 
experience. 

There are then two conflicting views in the Gita about the 
ultimate state, one which makes the freed soul lose itself in 
the impersonality of Brahman and attain a peace beyond the 
strife of the world, and the other where we possess and enjoy 
God, being lifted above all suffering and pain and the eagerness 
of petty desires, which are the badges of subjection. The 
Gita being a religious work insists on the ultimateness of 
a personal God, and calls for a full flowering of the divine in 
man to its utmost capacity of wisdom and power, love and 
universality. From this we cannot, however, conclude that 
the Gita view is opposed to that of the Upani§ads. The 
controversy is only a particular application of the general 
problem whether the absolute Brahman or the personal 
Purusottama is the highest reality. In the discussion of 
Gita metaphysics we have said that the Gita does not repudiate 
the ultimate reality of the absolute Brahman, but it suggests 
that from our point of view this absolute reveals itself as the 
personal Lord. There is no other way for thought, human 
and limited as it is, to envisage the highest reality. Adopting 
the same standpoint, we may say that the two views of the 
ultimate state of freedom are the intuitional and the 
intellectual ways of representing the one condition. From 
our human standpoint the absolute seems to be a passive, 
relationless identity, making all action impossible while it 
is not really so. It we want to give positive descriptions of 
it, then Ramanuja’s account is the only available one. To 
make out that the two, the absolute and the personal God, 
are one, the Gita says that in the highest reality impersonality 
and personality are combined in a manner that is incompre- 
hensible to us. Even so the freed spirits may have no indi- 
viduality, and yet have one by self-limitation. It is in this 
way that the Gita harmonises the ever immobile quietism of 
the timeless self with the eternal play of the energy of nature. 



THE THEISM OF THE BHAGAVADGlTA 579 

Whatever the truth be regarding the state of the freed 
after death, so long as he continues to live in the world, he 
is committed to some action or other. Samkara sees in his 
activity the modes of nature’s working, and Ramanuja the 
actions of the supreme. These are two different ways of 
expressing the impersonality of action. His work is done 
in a freedom of the soul and with an inner j oy and peace which 
does not depend on externals for its source or continuance. 
The freed souls throw off the listlessness of scepticism. All 
darkness is dispelled from their countenances. They show 
in their animated looks and firm voice that they have the 
vitality of a spiritual persuasion which they do not and cannot 
distrust. They are not subject to the dominion of flesh or 
attraction of desire. They are not cast down in adversity 
or elated in prosperity. They are strangers to anxiety, fear 
and anger. They possess an easy mind and the unspoiled 
virgin outlook of a child . 1 

The freed soul is beyond all good and evil. Virtue is 
transcended in perfection. The mukta rises above any mere 
ethical rule of living to the light, largeness and power of 
spiritual life. Even if he should have committed any evh 
acts which would in ordinary circumstances necessitate 
another birth on earth, no such thing is necessary. He is 
freed from ordinary rules and regulations. Absolute indi- 
vidualism is the view of the Gita so far as the end is 
concerned. It would be a dangerous doctrine if these freed 
men should imitate Nietzsche’s super-man, who has no 
patience with the weak and the unfit, the defective and 
the delinquent. Though they are freed from social obliga- 
tions, the free spirits of the Gita freely approve of them. 
The liberated do not suffer any vexation in themselves or 
cause vexation to others . 2 It is their second nature to werk 
for the welfare of the world. These noble souls regard with 
equal mind all things of the earth. They stand for a 
dynamic creative spiritual life, and see to it that the social 
regulations tend to the fuller spiritual unfolding or expres- 
sion of human life. They do their appointed work, niyatam 
karma, ordained by the divine will which works in them. 

1 Cf. Balabhavas tatha bhavo niicinto yoga ucyate. Jfianasariikalini 

Tantra. * xii. 15. 


VCI.. I 


19 * 



580 INDIAN PHILOSOPHY 

While the Gita insists much on social duties, it recognises 
a supra-social state. It believes in the infinite destiny of 
the individual apart from human society. The sannyasin 
is above all rules, caste and society. This symbolises the 
infinite dignity of man, who can strip himself of all externals, 
even wife and children, and be self-sufficient in the solitude 
of the desert if he has his God with him. It is not an 
ascetic ideal that the sannyasin adopts. He may be aloof 
from society, yet he has compassion for all. Mahadeva, 
the ideal ascetic, seated in the Himalayan snows, readily 
drinks poison for the saving of humanity. 

REFERENCES 

Telang : Bhagavadglta. S.B.E., vol. viii. 

Tilak : GItarahasya. 

Aukobindo Ghosh : Essays on the Gita. 



CHAPTER X 


BUDDHISM AS A RELIGION 


The history of Buddhism after the death of Buddha — Asoka — The 
Mahayana and the HInayana — Northern and southern Buddhism — 
Literature — HInayana doctrines — Metaphysics, ethics and religion — 
The rise of the Mahayana — Its monistic metaphysics — The religion 
of the Mahayana — Its resemblance to the Bhagavadgita — The 
ethics of the Mahayana — The ten stages — HInayana and Maha- 
yana ethics compared — Nirvana — Decline of Buddhism — The effects 
of Buddhism on Indian thought. 


I 

Sects of Buddhism 

Even in the lifetime of Buddha there were tendencies to 
schism among his followers, 1 though they did not develop 
on account of the magnetic personality of the founder. 
After his death they became emphasised. The Hlnayanists 
believe that the Theravada is identical with the three pitakas 
as now existing in Ceylon and compiled at the first council 
at Rajagrha. This first council tried, against much opposi- 
tion, to relax the rigours of asceticism and make some soften- 
ing changes in the rules. A second council took place at 
Vaisali about a hundred years after the first one. It con- 
sidered the theory and practices of the Vinaya, or the rules 
of the order, and debated whether any indulgences should 
be allowed or not. After a severe struggle, the more orthodox 
party, Sthaviras, 2 or the elders, succeeded in condemning 
the indulgences. The progressive party, or the Mahasanghikas. 
which was defeated, had large numbers to support them. 
They held a council called the Mahasangiti, or the great 
council. We have the story of this great council, from 

’ Witness the attempts of Devadatta. * Pali Theras. 

681 



582 INDIAN PHILOSOPHY 

the orthodox point of view, described in Dipavamsa. 1 2 3 
It is said to have overturned religion and “ broken up the 
old scriptures,” “ distorted the sayings and doctrines of 
the Nikayas,” and “ destroyed the spirit of Buddha’s teach- 
ing.” The main point of difference between the orthodox 
and the progressive sections seems to have been on the 
question of the attainment of Buddhahood. The Sthaviras 
held that it was a quality to be acquired by a strict observance 
of the rules of the Vinaya. The progressives maintained 
that Buddhahood was a quality inborn in every human 
being, and by adequate development it was capable of raising 
its possessor to the rank of a tathagata. The Sthaviravada, 
or the orthodox view, is said to be the lineal ancestor of 
Ceylonese Buddhism. Buddhism even in the second century 
of its existence had broken up into eighteen sects, all of them 
claiming to be the original faith. We do not know further 
details of the course of Buddhism till Anoka’s time. 1 When 
Asoka, the Mauryan emperor, adopted Buddhism two centuries 
and a half after Buddha’s death, there was a vigorous expan- 
sion of Buddhism. What was only a local sect of Hinduism 
for nearly three centuries after the death of Buddha became 
largely through the endeavours of A£oka a world religion. 3 
All over his vast empire, which extended from the valley of 
Kabul to the mouths of the Ganges and from the Himalayas 
to the south of the Vindhya mountains, he gave orders 
that his edicts should be engraven on stone pillars, so that 
they might abide for ever. He sent missionaries to all parts 
of India, from Kashmir to Ceylon, even to countries not 
under his sway. The thirteenth edict states that he sent 
missionaries to Antiochus II of Syria, Ptolemy II of Egypt, 
Antigonos Gonatos of Macedonia, Magas of Cyrene and 
Alexander II of Epirus. In the third century b.c. Buddhism 
entered Kashmir and Ceylon, and penetrated slowly into 
Nepal and Tibet, China, Japan and Mongolia. Asoka’s son 
Mahendra, it is said, was made the head of the Buddhist 

1 5 - 

2 “ Wc know, whether from native or foreign sources, very little of 
what happen. (1 during the century and half that followed after the Buddha’s 
death.” Rhys Davids ■ Buddhist India, p. 259. 

3 See V. Smith. Asoka, p. 22, 



BUDDHISM AS A RELIGION 583 

church of Ceylon. In view of the tendency for new practices 
to creep into the Buddhist religion, Asoka emphasised the 
moral side of Buddhism. 1 The increased respect paid to the 
order already attracted many men of doubtful views into 
it, and as the Mahavamsa says, “ heretics assumed the yellow 
robe in order to share in its advantages ; whenever they 
had opinions of their own they gave them forth as 
doctrines of the Buddha, they acted according to their 
own will, and not according to what was right.” 2 A 
third council met at Pataliputra 3 under the presidentship 
of Tissa, son of Moggali, with the object of purifying the 
doctrine. 

The new rulers of India, the Yavanas, the Sakas, the 
Ksatrapas, the Satavahanas, the Pahlavas and the Kusanas, 
many of whom were of foreign nationality, readily adopted 
the Buddhist religion. Though Brahminism had its repre- 
sentatives in the South and the West, yet the great majority 
were Buddhistic. Under the Guptas, who came to power in 
the first century a.d. (319 a.d. ?), Brahmanism revived. 
We read of Samudragupta’s ASvamedha sacrifice in the 
inscriptions of Candragupta at Madhura and Skandagupta 
in Behar. We have also many other monuments of 
Brahmanic revival. The sectarian worship of Siva and 
Visnu becomes popular. Subandhu in his Vasavadatta 
telis us that Buddhist doctrines were attacked by the 
followers of Jaimini.4 Prakrit, the chief language of 
the Buddhists, yielded to Sanskrit, as is evident from the 
Buddhist Sanskrit inscriptions of the era. Buddhism 
imitated Brahmanism in making a god of Buddha. Images 
of Buddha were set up, devotion to a personal being 
developed, and Nagarjuna, a contemporary of Kaniska, 
gave a distinct form to this type of Buddhism, called the 
Mahayana, though it was shaping itself even before his time. 
Mahayanism seems to be the culmination of the movement 

' Asoka mentions in one of his inscriptions that he caused a stupa 
(memorial building) of Kanakamuni to be put up for a second time. It is 
obvious that people had already taken to building stupas, making pilgrimages, 
etc. The fact that Kanakamuni was looked upon as a past Buddha shows 
that even then there was the belief in the series of Buddhas. 

1 38—39. 3 2 5 2 B - c> 

1 ivecij Jaiminimatanusarina iva tathagatamatadhvarii'irr.h. 



584 INDIAN PHILOSOPHY 

which led to the secession of the Mahasamghikas from the 
Theravadins. The decline of early Buddhism, the rise of 
Mahayanism and the revival of Brahmanism all synchronised. 
The Mahayana follows the canon drawn up by the council in 
Kaniska’s time, held at Jalandhara in the Punjab The 
original doctrine was much enlarged, new material was added, 
and a good deal of popular magic and superstition was incor- 
porated with it. Of course, it is the younger branch with Sans- 
krit, while the Hinayana is the older, with Pali as its language. 
The latter claims to represent the teaching of Gautama 
in its original form, and to preserve the rationalistic, monastic, 
and puritanic elements of his teaching. The Mahayana 
develops the doctrine in a mystical, theological and devotional 
way. The Hinayana has maintained its supremacy in Ceylon 
and Burma, the Mahayana in Nepal and China. A sharp 
opposition between the inwardness of the Hinayana, which 
withdraws from the visible world, and the adaptation to 
the world conditions characteristic of the Mahayana, runs 
throughout the subsequent history of the Buddhist religion. 
The latter is the great way meant for all, while the Hinayana 
is the little way fit only for a select few. In the South, 
where the Hinayana was the ruling faith, Kaniska’s council 
is not acknowledged. Hinayana Buddhism was called 
Southern Buddhism, since it prevailed in southern countries 
like Ceylon, while Mahayana is called the Northern, since 
it flourished in the North, Tibet, Mongolia, China, Korea 
and Japan. But this division seems to be an artificial one. 
Rhys Davids observes : “ There is not now, and never has 
been, any unity either of opinion or of language in what is 
called Northern or in what is called Southern Buddhism .” 1 
When we realise that almost all Buddhist canonical literature, 
wherever it might have extended, arose in the North of 
India, and recognise that the two are not separate compart- 
ments, but possess traces of mutual influence, we see that 
it is not necessary to call one northern and the other 
southern. It is clear, however, that the distinction between 
the Hinayana and the Mahayana was current even before the 
fourth century a.d. Fahian and Yuan Chwang mention 
the Hinayana, and it also occurs in the Lalitavistara. 

' Buddhist India, p. 173. 



BUDDHISM AS A RELIGION 


585 


The Hinayana bases itself on the Tali canon, while many 
of the Sanskrit works of Buddhism belong to the Mahayana. 
The Mahayana Buddhism posseses no canon, since it does 
not represent any homogeneous sect. 1 


1 The most important works of the school are the following nine : 
(i) Astasahasrikaprajnaparamita, (2) Gandavyuha, (3) Daiabhumlsvara, 
(4) Samadhiraja, (5) Laffkavatara, (6) Saddharmapundarlka, (7) Tatha- 
gataguhyaka, (8) Lalitavistara, (9) Suvarnaprabhasa. The Prajnaparamita 
(a.d. 200) deals with the six perfections of a Bodhisattva, especially 
with the highest prajfia or wisdom, the knowledge of the doctrine of 
Sunya. An abridged edition of it, attributed to Nagarjuna, is the Maha- 
yana Sutras, from which Nagarjuna derives his own Madhyamika Sutras. 
The Gandavyuha celebrates the Bodhisattva ManjusrI, and teaches the 
doctrines of sunyata, dharmakaya and the redemption of the world by 
bodhisattvas. The Dasabhumisvara (a.d. 400) details the ten stages by 
which Buddhahood is reached. Samadhiraja, or the king of meditations, is 
a dialogue describing the various stages of contemplation through which a 
bodhisattva can attain the highest enlightenment. The Lahkavatara 
Sutra (a.d. 400) describes the Yogacara views. The Saddharma-Pundarlka, 
or the lotus of the law (a.d. 250), makes Buddha a god above gods, an im- 
measurably exalted being who has lived for countless ages and will live for 
ever. According to it every man can become a Buddha who has heard his 
preaching and performed meritorious acts. Even those who adore relics 
and erect stupas attain the highest enlightenment. Lalitavistara, as its 
title signifies, gives a detailed account of the sport of Buddha. It looks upon 
the life-work of Buddha as a diversion of the supreme being. Edwin Arnold’s 
Light of Asia is based on it. The contents of Suvarnaprabhasa are partly 
philosophical and partly legendary. It deals also with tantra ritual. The 
two Sukhavatlvyuhas, as well as the Amitayurdhyana Sutra, Vajracchedika, 
or the Diamond Cutter, are popular in Japan. The Sukhavativyuha (a.d. 100) 
contains a detailed account of the land of bliss and praises Amitabha. 
Karandavyuha, akin to the later Hindu Puranas, is devoted to the exaltation 
of Avalokitesvara, the Lord who looks down with compassion on all things, 
the typical bodhisattva, who in the exercise of infinite pity refuses Buddha- 
hood till all beings are saved. The yearning for universal salvation is power- 
fully expressed in it. Mahavastu, the book of great events, is called a Hinayana 
work, and belongs to the heretical sect of the Lokottaravadins, %vho regard 
Buddha as a supernatural being. It contains many Mahayanist doctrines, 
such as an enumeration of the ten states of a bodhisattva, hymns to Buddha, 
emphasis on the worship of Buddha as a means to salvation. Asvaghosa’s 
Buddhacarita (first century a.d.), is one of the chief classics of Mahayana 
Buddhism. This author’s works include Saundarananda kavya, which 
deals with the conversion of Nanda, half-brother of Buddha. Vajrasuci, or 
the Diamond Needle, is also attributed to him. Arya^ura is a poet of 
Asvaghosa’s school (fourth century a.d .) . He composed a famous J atakamala, 
or garland of jatakas. Ssantideva’s §iksasamuccaya (seventh century) is a 
manual of Mahayana teaching. Bodhicaryavatara is a religious poem of great 
merit. For a detailed account of these Mahayana works see Nariman : Literary 
History of Sanskrit Buddhism, and Rajendral Lai Mitra : Nepalese Buddhist 
Literature. The dates here given are only probable. 



586 


INDIAN PHILOSOPHY 


II 

HInayana Buddhism 

The HInayana Buddhism is a logical development of 
the principles of the canonical works. The unsystematic 
views expressed in them and discernible in Milinda are later 
developed into the system embodied in the Abhidharmas of 
the Vaibhasikas (the Sarvastivadins) and the works of 
Buddhaghosa and Abhidharmasamgraha. According to the 
HInayana Buddhism all things are momentary. 1 The 
so-called permanent entities, space and nirvana, do not 
exist. They are names of negations. All being consists of 
momentary entities called dharmas. There is no thinker, 
but only thoughts ; no feeler, but only feelings. It is a pure 
phenomenalism maintaining the non-existence of substances 
or individuals. 2 It believes in the absolute existence of 
dharmas, small and brief realities which, grouped as cause 
and effect, create the pseudo-individuals. 

The goal of existence is the attainment of nirvana or 
cessation of consciousness. All consciousness is a feeling 
for something, and therefore bondage. 3 There is no specula- 
tion in the HInayana about what remains after nirvana. 

The arhat ideal is the distinguishing-mark of the HInayana, 
which believes in the possibility of emancipation through 
one’s own powers. The method is contemplation and 
meditation 4 on the four truths. The HInayana Buddhism 
is indefinite about the Buddhahood of those who reach 
arhata, nor does it suggest that every creature may attain 
Buddhahood. We cannot help feeling that the ideal of the 
arhat, the perfect egoist, who is useless to others, is untrue 
to the real personality of Buddha, the man of pity and 
compassion, though the dependence on the saviour Buddha 
of the Mahayana faith is also untrue to the teaching of the 
original Buddha, however useful it may be. The HInayana 
ideal may be justly summed up in the statement of Ibsen : 
“ There are actually moments when the whole history of 


' Yat sat tat ksanikam. 
nv.B.T, p. 162. 


1 Pudgalanairatmya. 

4 Dariana and bhavana. 



BUDDHISM AS A RELIGION 587 

the world appears to me like one great shipwreck, and the 
only important thing seems to be to save oneself.” 

The arhata is the highest condition, the state of sainthood, 
when the fire of passion is extinguished, where there is no 
more karma to bind us to rebirth. Buddha is said to 
have attained this state at the beginning of his ministry. 
The attainment of nirvana on earth by self-control does not 
require the aid of any supernatural power. The greatest of 
all beings, Buddha himself, is to be revered simply because of 
the example and the teaching he has left us and for nothing 
more. The Hinayanists try to achieve the goal in the solitude 
of their cells, segregated from the common life of men. In 
the Khaggavisana Sutta family life and social intercourse 
are strictly prohibited. “ To him who leads a social life 
affections arise and the pain which follows affection .” 1 
The followers of the Hinayana are called upon to shut their 
eyes as they pass along the highways of the world, lest their 
sight should rest on any outward beauty. A wise man “ should 
avoid married life as if it were a burning pit of live-coals ” 

In friendship of the world anxiety is born, 

In household life distraction’s dust springs up. 

The state set free from home and friendship’s ties 
That, and that only, is the recluse’s aim. 1 

He who wants to attain nirvana according to 
Visuddhimagga should resort to the cremation ground, which 
is a school of many exquisite virtues, and imparts to us the 
lesson that the world and the self are unreal. We cannot 
reach our goal by means of a life of love and activity. The 
lack of warmth and passionlessness of the arhat ideal are 
not inspiring. It may well be that in those days of loosely 
knit social life, these beliefs had a great value. But the 
world cannot become a monastery. We cannot have a 
compulsory conscription of men, women and children into 
cloisters. Disgust of life does not represent all that is 
substantial in the life of man. True asceticism is not 
indifference to the suffering of the world, but the building 

■ ii. 

* Muni Sutta of Sutta Nipata, i. 12; quoted in Milinda, iv. 5. 1. 



588 INDIAN PHILOSOPHY 

up of a silent centre even in the furious activity of life. 
We must be spiritual enough to possess our souls in the 
noise of the blatant world, and not merely in the peace and 
silence of an anchorite’s apartment. Early Buddhism, 
unlike the Hinayana, required us to look for our opportunities 
in the retreats of misery and the haunts of pain, the clamour 
of the crowd and the tumult of traffic. 

The Hinayana developed an anthropomorphic conception, 
based on the popular polytheism, and believed in one supreme 
Creator and many subordinate deities. These gods were 
neither omnipotent nor omniscient. They were introduced 
simply because meditation is an essential stage of discipline. 
The historical Buddha was glorified, even deified, and thus 
the need for an object of reverence was met. The gods are 
said to have paid their homage at his birth and death. 
Buddha is the God over gods, devatideva, supreme in know- 
ledge and power, and yet there is no defined relation of the 
worshipper and the worshipped. Strictly speaking, Buddha 
is only a preacher, a guide to truth. He is neither divine 
nor supernatural. He is different from other saints who 
have also attained bodhi, for he not only discovered the 
truths of salvation, but also declared them to the world. 
In the orthodox Hinayana, Buddha was but a man like 
other men, only with greater genius and power of intuition. 
Worship of Buddha is merely an act of commemoration. 
Some conservative followers of this religion held that we 
could imitate Buddha, though we are not qualified for his 
perfection . 1 They cherished the hope of being born in the 
good resort of the heavenly worlds and finishing their journey 
on the way of bodhi at some future time. The Hinayana 
seems to have practically ignored Gautama’s advice regarding 
speculation about the unseen. Admitting first Buddha, 
then the munis entering on the path leading to Buddhahood, 
and then the Hindu deities, the Hinayana became practically 
a polytheism. Philosophical phenomenalism and religious 
polytheism with monarchical tendencies are what we have 
here. The Hinayana is a colourless religion denying 

» One section of the HInayanists called theLokottaravadins makes Buddha 
a superhuman being, lokottara, who comes down to the world to save man- 
kind for a short time. 



BUDDHISM AS A RELIGION 


589 


God in doctrine, though allowing worship of Buddha in 
practice. There is no devotion or bhakti, which implies 
a living God. 

The HInayana Buddhism is not merely a way to nirvana, 
but also teaches us the way to rebirth into the world of Brahma 
by the grace and help of holy saints. Heaven and hell are 
accepted. The view is an expression of weariness or disgust 
with the endless strife of becoming, of the relief found in 
mere ceasing from effort. It is not a healthy-minded doctrine. 
A sort of world hatred is its inspiring motive. It prefers 
negative and philosophically strict definitions, while the 
Mahayana aims at positive and religious expressions. The 
former represents more faithfully the historical traditions of 
Buddha, while the latter aspires to please the masses by 
promising to fulfil the needs of the heart. By its abstract and 
negative tendencies the HInayana became the incarnation 
of dead thought and the imprisonment of spirit. It gives 
us neither a warm faith for which to live nor a real ideal for 
which to work. 


Ill 

The Mahayana 

If the doctrines belonging to the period between the rise 
of Buddhism and the time of Asoka perhaps represent early 
Buddhism, the views that prevailed in the time of Asoka 
may be said to be the HInayana doctrine. The tendencies 
that developed during the period from A£oka to Kaniska 
and became explicit thereafter form the Mahayana Buddhism. 
A cold, passionless metaphysics devoid of religious teaching 
could not long inspire enthusiasm and joy. The HInayana 
ignored the groping of the spirit of man after something higher 
and wronged the spiritual side of man. The philosophical 
atheism of the HInayana is the skeleton in the box, the diseased 
worm in the beautiful flower. The wronged sides of human 
nature asserted their rights and rebelled against the cold 
understanding with an imperious violence which was as 
tyrannical and exclusive as that of the understanding had 
been. The famishing soul and the thirsting fancy sought 



590 INDIAN PHILOSOPHY 

to derive nourishment from the suggestive symbolism 
of the prevailing religion. The life of Buddha could arouse 
emotion. Naturally Buddha was made a god. He was 
the realisation of the moral idea, the law personified. 
The metaphysically minded Hinayanist, out of loyalty to 
the teaching of Buddha, might have hesitated, torn off the 
thin disguise for despair, and looked upon Buddha as no 
more than human. But a faith which failed to quicken 
the flame of devotion had either to undergo modification or 
perish. 

In ethics the monastic tendency with all its conse- 
quences of detachment from the world’s affairs, the morbid 
suppression of all human interests and pleasures, the impos- 
sible extinction of natural life proved unsatisfying to human 
nature. Man is bound to the world he tries to escape from. 
If freedom from servitude to the not-self means the extinc- 
tion of self, then death is our goal. Buddha meant by free- 
dom triumph over not-self, but not its destruction. The 
Mahayanists contend that Buddha is no preacher of penance. 
He does not shut his eyes to the world when he attains nirvana, 
but offers light to it that it may reach its goal. “ I 
would be a guard to them that have no protection, a guide 
unto the traveller, a ship, a well spring, a bridge, for the 
seekers of that shore ; I would be a lamp to such as need a 
lamp, a bed for the weary that need a bed, the very slave of 
such as need service.” 1 In the Hinayana, nirvana became 
negatively interpreted as extinction of all being. It is 
not possible for ordinary man to fall in love with 
annihilation. 

The negative philosophy of the Hinayana could not be- 
come a popular religion. When Buddhism became universal 
in spirit and embraced large masses, the Hinayana could 
not serve. A religion more catholic than the Hinayana, a 
less ascetic ideal was required. When Buddhism spread 
throughout India and even beyond it, it ceased to set itself 
up in opposition to the prevailing religions, but insinuated 
itself slowly into other forms. In the formative stages of 
the Mahayana Buddhism there were successive movements 
of the nomadic tribes from outside into the country. Hordes 
1 Bodhicaryavatara. 



BUDDHISM AS A RELIGION 591 

of half-civilised tribes captured parts of the Punjab and 
Kashmir . 1 Many of the aliens adopted the religion and 
language, culture and civilisation of the Buddhist peoples 
whom they conquered. Kaniska, the most powerful of 
the princes, himself became a Buddhist. The centre of 
power moved from the East to the West. Pali gave place 
to Sanskrit. The uncivilised soaked in superstitious practices 
did not embrace Buddhism without transforming it. They 
reduced the higher religion to the level of their understanding. 
Though there were doctrinal differences between the Mahayana 
Buddhism and the Brahmanical views, still the complexion 
it assumed for its followers was nothing new or unheard of 
in the times. The Mahayana found that it could capture 
the peoples’ minds only if it gave up the icy coldness of 
some forms of early Buddhism and framed a religion which 
could appeal to the human heart. It imitated the successful 
experiments of Hinduism embodied in the theism of the 
Yoga, of the later Upanisads and of the Bhagavadgita. 

The Mahayana Buddhism gives us positive ideas of 
God, soul and human destiny. “ The Mahayana, or Great 
Vessel, is so called by its adherents in contradistinction to 
the Hinayana, or little vessel, of primitive Buddhism ; the 
former offers to all beings in all worlds salvation by faith and 
love as well as by knowledge, while the latter only avails 
to convey over the rough sea of becoming, to the farther 
shore of nibbana those few strong souls who require no 
external spiritual aid nor the consolation of worship. The 
Hinayana, like the ‘ unshown way ’ of those who seek the 
‘ Nirguna Brahman,’ is exceeding hard ; whereas the 
burden of the Mahayana is light, and does not require that 
a man should immediately renounce the world and all the 
affections of humanity. The manifestation of the body 
of the Law, says the Mahayana, is adapted to the various 
needs of the children of the Buddha ; whereas the Hinayana 
is only of avail to those who have left their spiritual childhood 
far behind them. The Hinayana emphasises the necessity 

1 It is still a question whether Buddhism entered China in its older form 
of the Hinayana or the younger form of the Mahayana, but however this 
may be, the Mahayana soon grew predominant, and has been in the ascendant 
till to-day. 



592 


INDIAN PHILOSOPHY 


of saving knowledge, and aims at the salvation of the indh 
vidual, and refuses to develop the mystery of nibbana in 
a positive sense ; the Mahayana lays as much or greater 
stress on love, and aims at the salvation of every sentient 
being, and finds in nirvana the One Reality, which is ‘ void ’ 
only in the sense that it is free from the limitations of 
every phase of the limited or contingent experience of which 
we have empirical knowledge.” 1 The Hinayana protests 
against the Mahayana as an accommodation of the pure 
teaching to the necessities of human nature. Anyway, 
while it stands as an example to the world of realising the 
highest through knowledge, the Mahayana requires us to 
take part in the world, evolving new social and religious 
ideals. The absence of the supernatural and the consequent 
lack of any scope for imagination, the morbid way of solving 
the central problems of life, the reduction of nirvana to 
extinction and ethical life to a monastic asceticism, made 
the Hinayana a religion for the thinking and the strong 
in spirit, while a new development had to arise for the 
emotional and the worshipful. 


IV 

The Mahayana Metaphysics 

We shall notice here the general philosophical principles 
of the Mahayana, postponing to a later section a detailed 
discussion of its two important schools, the Sunyavada, 
which holds that all is void, and the Vijnanavada, which 
declares that nothing exists except in consciousness. While 
the Hinayana looks upon the soul as a complex of transitory 
elements or skandhas, the Mahayana holds that even these 
elements are not real. This does not mean that there is 
nothing real. A metaphysical substratum is admitted. 
This reality in its ontological aspect is called Bhutatathata, 
or the essence of existence. In its religious aspect it is 
called Dharmakaya. It is the highest principle which har- 
monises all contradictions. It is also called Nirvana, since 


* A. Coomaraswamy : Buddha and the Gospel of Buddhism , pp. 236-227 



BUDDHISM AS A RELIGION 


593 


it brings absolute peace to the torn heart. It is Bodhi, or 
wisdom. It directs the course of the world and gives shape 
to all. Mahayana metaphysics is monistic in character. 
All objects in the world are of one reality. The nature of 
this reality is beyond language and description. “ Things 
in their fundamental nature cannot be named or explained. 
They cannot be adequately expressed in any form of language. 
They are bejmnd the range of perception, and have no 
distinctive features. They possess absolute sameness, and 
are subject neither to transformation nor to destruction. 
They are nothing else but one soul, for which tathata 
is another designation.” 1 “ There is then neither that 
which speaks nor that which is spoken of ; neither that which 
thinks nor that which is thought ; when you conform to 
tathata and when your subjectivity is completely obliterated, 
it is then that you will be said to have insight.” 3 The 
absolute is free from relativity, individuality and conditioned- 
ness, though it is the self-existent and the source of all. It 
is “ the effulgence of great wisdom ; the universal illumina- 
tion of the dharmadhatu (universe), the true and adequate 
knowledge, the mind pure and clean in its nature ; the eternal, 
the blessed, the self-regulating and the pure, the immutable 
and the free. ”3 

The world of experience is phenomenal and not real. 
It is compared to a dream, though it is not without meaning. 
The Mahayana Buddhists liken the universe to a maya, 
mirage, flash of lightning or froth. 4 All things of the world 
have the three aspects of (i) quintessence, (2) attributes, and 
(3) activities. If we take a jar, its quintessence is the 
earth, its attribute is the form of the jar, and its activity 
is to keep water. The attribute and activity are subject 
to law of birth and death, while the quintessence is indes- 
tructible. The waves of the ocean may be high or low, but 
the water itself neither increases nor decreases. The whole 
universe has its unchanged aspect as well as its changeable 
one. Bhutatathata is the former, the absolute which 
persists throughout all space and time as the basis of all. 
This universal eternal substratum answers to the Brahman of 

1 Suzuki ’s version of : The Awakening of Faith , p. 56. 

* Ibid., p, 58. J Ibid., p. 96. 4 LahtaviHa+a. 



594 


INDIAN PHILOSOPHY 


the Upanisads. 1 In the realm of absolute truth or paramartha 
we have nothing else. But in the region of relative truth 
or samvrti we have the one made many by name and form. 
The absolute has the two states of the unconditioned and 
the conditioned, the realm of being proper and that of 
life and death. The Mahayana holds a middle position 
regarding the nature of the world. It is neither real nor 
unreal. It affirms that it actually exists, but denies its 
absolute reality. Waves exist, but not absolutely. The 
world is a phenomenon, impermanent, subject to flux and 
change. Since the reality pervades all, everything individual 
is the whole potentially, or, in religious language, every 
individual is a potential Buddha. The Avatamsaka Sutra 
says : “ There is not even one living being that has not the 
wisdom of the tathagata. It is only because of the vain 
thoughts and affections, that all beings are not conscious of 
this.” The individual souls are aspects of the absolute. 
As water is the essence of the waves, so the tathata is the 
reality of persons. That which passes from existence to 
existence is the ego, which is not the imperishable soul. 
The passing ego is an embodiment of the permanent reality, 
and everything on earth has a quintessence of the uncreate 
and eternal reality. “ In the one soul we may distinguish 
two aspects, the soul as pure being and the soul in sam- 
sara . . . the two are so closely inter-related that one 
cannot be separate from the other.” 3 

The rise of the world is accounted for as usual by a 
metaphysics of metaphors. Ignorance or avidya is said 
to be the cause of the world. “ All things on account of 
our confused subjectivity appear under the forms of individu- 
ation. If we could overcome this subjectivity, the signs 
of individuation would disappear, and there would be no 
trace of a world of objects.” 3 “ When the mind of all 

creatures which in its own nature is pure and clean, is 
stirred up by the wind of ignorance, the waves of mentality 

1 The Mahayanists seemed to have been aware of the similarity of their 
position to the Upamsad view. So the Lankavatara Sutra says, that 
“ the explanation of the Tathagatagar’uha as the ultimate truth and reality 
is given in order to attract to our new even those who have superstitious 
faith in the Atman theory'.” 

* Suzuki. Awakening of Faith, p. 55. 


J Ibid., p. 36. 



BUDDHISM AS A RELIGION 595 

make their appearance. These three, mind, ignorance and 
mentality, have no absolute existence.” 1 * 3 Neither subjec- 
tivity nor the external world which is negated is real. “ As 
soon as subjectivity is rendered empty and unreal, we per- 
ceive the pure soul manifesting itself as eternal, permanent, 
immutable, completely comprising all things that are pure.”* 
The explanation of the world is that there is in reality no world 
at all but avidya produces it. Whence did this negative prin- 
ciple of ignorance come ? No answer is given. It is there, 
and it breaks the silence of the absolute, and starts the wheel 
of samsara, transforming the one into the many. We project 
the element of avidya into pure being hypothetically, illu- 
sorily, apparently. The world of experience is a manifesta- 
tion of pure being conditioned by avidya. However illusory 
in its ultimate nature, avidya must exist in the being of 
tathata. Asvaghosa suggests that the avidya is a spark 
arising from the unfathomable depths of pure being. He 
identifies it with consciousness. This awakening of conscious- 
ness marks the first step in the rise of the world from the 
self-identity of tathata or pure being. Then the distinctions 
of subject and object arise. The original being was the 
absolute, where the subject and the object merged into one. 
Though it is different from absolute nothingness, we cannot 
give a logical description of it. The moment we come 
back from that stage which we are said to realise in bodhi 
or perfect enlightenment, we seem to possess the world of 
contrasts and relations. Avidya starts the cosmic process. 
Intellectually we can only say that this element of nega- 
tivity is in the very heart of the absolute. Why ? Because 
it is there. The jewel is in the lotus 3 ; the self- 
creative force is in the absolute. The real and the 

1 P. 68. 

1 In the enlightened condition we know that all things are the one abso- 
lute reality. Asvaghosa writes : “ Ail so-called illusory phenomena are in 
truth from the beginning what they are ; and their essence is nothing but 
the one soul.. Though ignorant minds that cling to illusory objects cannot 
understand that all things are in their nature the highest reality (para- 
marthal, all Buddha tathagatas being free from clinging are able to have 
an insight into the true nature of things — therefore the mind that is saturated 
with subjectivity is annihilated, all things are understood and otnniscn nee 
is attained.” (Suzuki : Awakening oj Faith, p. 126. See also p. 60.) 

3 Cf. Om mam padme hum. 



596 


INDIAN PHILOSOPHY 


phenomenal are not ultimately different. They are two 
moments of the same thing, one reality with two aspects. 
The universe would be utterly unmeaning, absolutely 
unreal, if it were not in some way the expression of the 
real. The realm of birth and death is the manifestation 
of the immortal. It is the appearance in time and space, 
the actualisation of the absolute. The ultimate reality 
is sarvasattva, the soul of all things, real and imaginary. 
" This pure being becomes birth and death (samsara), in which 
are revealed the quintessence, the attributes and the activity 
of the Mahayana or the great reality, (i) The first is the 
greatness of quintessence. The quintessence of the Maha- 
yana as pure being exists in all things, remains unchanged in 
the pure as well as in the defiled, is always one and the same 
(samata), neither increases nor decreases, and is void of 
distinction. (2) The second is the greatness of attributes. 
Here we have the Tathagata’s womb, which contains im- 
measurable and innumerable merits (punya) as its charac- 
teristics. (3) The third is the greatness of activity, for it 
produces all kinds of good works in the world phenomenal 
and super-phenomenal.” 1 


V 

The Mahayana Religion 

The rebellion of man against his nature cannot last long. 
The needs of the human heart stand in the way of the 
unimpeded march of the critical spirit. There were passages 
enough even in the canonical writings to satisfy the heart 
of man. In Majjhima Nikaya (22) it is said that even those 
who have not entered into the paths “ are sure of heaven,” 
" if they have love and faith towards Me.” It is an echo 
of the Gita doctrine of bhakti. The Mahayana uses these 
texts and believes in a saviour God. There is no unity in 
the Mahayana religion. It suffered religious superstitions 
gladly. Wherever it prevailed, India, China, Korea, Siam, 
Burma and Japan, the indigenous religions were tolerated, 
while it took care to teach them a new respect for life, 

> Suzuki : The Awakening of Faith, pp. 53-54. 



BUDDHISM AS A RELIGION 597 

kindness to animals and resignation. So long as men 
conformed to certain ethical rules and respected the order 
of monks, the Buddhist teachers did not feel called upon 
to condemn the superstitious usages. It does not matter 
what gods you worship, so long as you are good. The 
protean character of Mahayana Buddhism is due to this 
tendency. In each of the countries where it was adopted 
it had a separate history and doctrinal development. 

It does not concern us here to narrate the history of 
the later fortunes of the Buddhist faith in countries beyond 
the limits of India. If the Buddhist religion started with a 
grim, austere, self-repressive code, and ended with temple 
courts crumbling, mouldering and worn, it is due to its 
tolerant spirit. It is impossible for crude and rude tribes 
to become converts to Buddhism without making their 
own contribution to it. The freedom of opinion in religious 
matters is in consonance with the metaphysical views 
of the Mahayana. All religions are revelations of the 
same Dharmakaya and bring out some aspects of truth. 
Dharma is the all-pervading spiritual force, the ultimate and 
the supreme principle of life. The first attempt at personi- 
fying dharma is in the conception of Adi Buddha, the first 
cause, the eternal God, superior to all things, the supreme, 
the first of all the Buddhas, without equal or comparison . 1 
Even this Adi Buddha is a metaphysical conception remote 
from life and experience, and not an active force in touch 
with the world which he is said to have brought into being. 
The work of saving the world is done by the Buddhas, or the 
beings endowed with the highest intelligence and love. 
There have been an infinite number of these Buddhas in 
the past, and there will be an infinite number in future. 
Since the goal of every individual is to become a Buddha, 
there are many Buddhas. These who are secure in their 
own prospect of emancipation delay accepting it for the 
good of others They are all transitory manifestations of 
the One Eternal Being. The historic Buddha is one such 
manifestation of the moral ideal. He is not the One Reality, 

1 The Sutralamkara criticises the doctrine of Adi Buddha on the ground 
that no one can become a Buddha without proper equipment (sambhara) 
of merit and knowledge, but this means a long past. 



598 


INDIAN PHILOSOPHY 


but a god among many others. Amitabha sits on one side 
of him, and Avalokitesvara, who saves the faithful by his 
grace, on the other. 1 The supreme Being is viewed in different 
aspects to suit the needs of different men. “ I reveal the 
law in its multifariousness with regard to the inclinations 
and dispositions of creatures, I use different means to rouse 
each according to his own character.” 2 3 Many of the Vedic 
gods become aspects of the One Supreme. Nagarjuna 
by his precept and practice taught that the Hindu gods of 
Brahma, Visnu, fsiva and Kali had the attributes assigned 
to them in the Brahmanical scriptures, and were proper 
objects of propitiation. The traditional gods of the Hindus 
were fitted into a new system, where separate places and 
functions were assigned to them. 3 Mahayanism is so called 
because it included a vast number of bodhisattvas, arch- 
angels and saints, which are only the ancient gods of Vedic 
Aryans thinly disguised by Buddhistic symbolism. There 
is no doubt that in giving a large place to bhakti or devotion 
the Mahayana scheme of salvation opened the breaches 
to Tantrikism and other mystic forms. 4 

The monistic metaphysics of the Mahayana has given 
rise to an apparently polytheistic religion, but we should 
note that the several gods are subordinate to a single head. 
This unity of the Mahayana religion may be brought out 
by relating it to the doctrine of the three kayas, which is 
allegorical in its significance. The Dharmakaya is the 
timeless, unconditioned spiritual reality of dharma. It is 
not a personal being revealing itself in a single historical 
figure, but is the all-pervading ground, which without suffer- 


1 Asvaghosa : Awakening of Faith, Suzuki’s translation, p. 68. 

1 Cf. Bhagavadgita, ix. 44 ff., and Saddharmapundarlka, ii. 

3 Indra becomes Satamanvu and Vajrapani, with his own kingdom 
of heavens (svarga), called Trayastrmsaloka. Brahma had his chief 
characters transferred to Maijusri, the lamp of wisdom. Sarasvatl con- 
tinued to be one of his wives, the other being LaksmI. Avalokitesvara 
or' Padinapani has the attributes of Visnu or Padmanabha. Virupaksa 
is one of the names of £iva, though in Buddhistic legend he is one of the 
four kings. Gane.'a is taken over both as Vinayaka and demon Yinataka. 
The Sapta tathugatas are the seven rsis. Ajita formed with Sakyamuni 
and Avalokitesvara a triad. 

* Cf. Col. Waddell’s description of Mahayana Buddhism as " a mysticism 
of sophistic nihilism." 



BUDDHISM AS A RELIGION 


599 


ing any modification assumes a variety of forms. The 
Dharmakaya answers to the impersonal absolute, the 
Brahman of the Upanisads. It is not so much the body of 
the law as the fathomless being or the norm of all existence. 1 
When the absolute principle assumes name and form, we 
have the transformation of the Dharmakaya into the 
Sambhogakaya. The substance which persists becomes the 
subject which enjoys. The Brahman is now the Isvara. 
He is the God in heaven, determined by the name and form, 
omniscient, omnipresent, omnipotent, the Adi Buddha, 
supreme over all the Buddhas. When we pass to the 
Nirmanakaya, we get the several manifestations of this 
one activity into avatars, or incarnations. 

Every Buddha partakes of the nature of the three kayas. 
The very nature of the Buddha is the bodhi, or enlighten- 
ment. But till he attains absolute nirvana he possesses 
and enjoys the fruit of his deeds as a bodhisattva, and has 
a beatific body, or sambhogakaya. The historical Buddhas 
are these real Buddhas, sovereigns of celestial worlds ap- 
pearing on earth to redeem mankind. “I am one of a long 
series of Buddhas. Many were born before and many 
will be born in future. When the wickedness and violence 
rule over the earth, Buddha takes his birth to establish 
the kingdom of righteousness on earth.” 2 3 “ The exalted 
one appears in the world for salvation to many people, 
for joy to many people, out of compassion for the world, as 
a blessing, a salvation, the joy of gods and men.” 3 

So far as the Mahayana is concerned, there is practically 
nothing to distinguish it from the religion of the Bhagavadgita. 
The metaphysical conception of Dharmakaya, or the ultimate 
foundation of existence, corresponds to the Brahman of the 
Gita. As Krsna calls himself the Supreme One, even so 
Buddha is made into a Supreme God. He is not an ordinary 
deity, but the devatideva, the paramount God of gods. 4 
He is the creator of all bodhisattvas.5 That Buddha reached 


1 This is evident from its synonyms, Svabhavakaya, or nature-body ; 
Tattva, snchness ; 6unya, the abyss; the Nirvana; the eternal liberty; 

Samadhikaya, or the rapture body. 

3 Cf. this with the Gita, iv. 7-8. 3 Anguttara Nikaya. 

♦ Saddharmapundarika, vii. 31. 5 Ibid , xiv. 



600 


INDIAN PHILOSOPHY 


bodhi, enlightenment at Gaya, is a fancy of the unregenerate. 
“ I am the father of the world, sprung from myself,” says 
Buddha of himself, " it is only because I know how the fatuous 
are of perverted sense and blind that I, who have never ceased 
to exist, give myself out as departed.” 1 Buddha has been 
from eternity. His enormous love for humanity is brougnt 
out by the parable of the burning house. 2 3 All beings are 
his children. 3 “ The Tathagata, having left the conflagration 
of the three worlds, is dwelling in peace in the tranquillity 
of his forest abode, saying to himself all three worlds are 
my possession, all living beings are my children, the world 
is full of intense tribulation, but I myself will work out their 
salvation.” “ To all who believe me I do good, while friends 
are they to me who seek refuge in me. ”4 

The doctrine of the three kayas is applied to the individual 
human being. In all beings there is the Dharmakaya, 
or the permanent reality ; immediately over it we have 
the body of enjoyment, or the Sambhogakaya, the spirit 
individualised, and then the Nirmanakaya, where the mind 
is defiled. 


VI 

Ethics 

The ethical ideal of the Mahayana is the bodhisattva, 
as distinct from the arhat of the Hinayana. Bodhisattva 
literally means “ one whose essence is perfect knowledge.” 
But historically it means “ one who is on the way to the 
attainment of perfect knowledge, a future Buddha.” The 
term was first used of Gautama Buddha during the period 
of his search for liberation. It therefore came to mean 
“ a Buddha designate,” or a man destined to become a Buddha 
in this or in some future life. When once nirvana is attained, 
all earthly relations come to an end. A bodhisattva out 
of the abundance of his love for suffering humanity stops 
short of nirvana. Weak man in times of stress and sorrow 

1 Saddharmabimdarlka, xv. 21. See B.G., iv. 9. 

1 Lotus, chap, iii ; Mahavagga, i. 21. 

3 Lotus, p. 89. 

« Lalitavistara, viii. Cf. B.G., vii. 16. 



BUDDHISM AS A RELIGION 


601 


requires a personal guide, and these lofty beings, who can 
tread the path of the nirvana, engage themselves in the 
task of leading men into the true way of knowledge. The 
Hlnayana ideal 'of complete absorption, or arhattva, the 
lonely journey on the trackless path of eternity, this isolated 
bliss is, according to Mahayana, the temptation of the Mara . 1 

The career of an aspirant to Buddhahood represented in 
the early Buddhism by the eight-fold path is here elaborated 
into ten bhumis or stages. The first stage is the joyful 
(pramudita) one characterised by the rise of the thought of 
bodhi . 2 It is here that the bodhisattva makes those preg- 
nant resolutions (pranidhana) which determine the future 
course. The resolution of Avalokitesvara not to accept 
salvation until the last particle of dust shall have attained 
to Buddhahood before him is such a vow. The insight is 
developed gradually so as to render the heart pure and the 
mind free from the illusion of self. The recognition of the 
impermanence of things enlarges the aspirant’s compassionate 
nature, and we get next the stage of vimala, or purity. In 
it we have the practice of morality and the exercise of wisdom 
(adhicitta). In the next stage the bodhisattva engages 
himself in the various bhavanas which enable him to annihilate 
anger, hatred and error, and promote faith, compassion, 
charity and disinterestedness. This is the third stage 
(prabhakarl), where the seeker shines with patience and 
forbearance. The bodhisattva, to surrender all traces of 
egoism, trains himself in good work and applies himself 
specially to the cultivation of virtues connected with bodhi 
(bodhipaksa dharma). It is the fourth radiant stage 
(arcismatl). Then does the seeker begin a course of study 
and meditation to understand the four noble truths in 
their true light. It is the fifth invincible (sudurjaya) stage 
where dhyana and samadhi predominate. As a result 
of moral practice and meditation, the seeker turns to the 
basic principles of dependent origination and non-substanti- 


« Astasahasrikaprajuaparamita, xi. To use William James’s picturesque 
expression, if at the last day all creation was shouting hallelujah, and there 
remained one cockroach with an unrequited love, that would spoil the peace 
of a bodhisattva, though not the absorption of the arhat. 

* Cittotpada. 



602 INDIAN PHILOSOPHY 

ality. This stage is called abhimukhi, or " turned towards.” 
Here prajna reigns. Yet he is not completely free from 
passion, and still has the desires of becoming a Buddha and 
the intention of saving mankind. He devotes himself to 
the attainment of that knowledge which would enable him 
to effect his aim of universal salvation. He is now in the 
seventh stage, called durarhgama. When he is free from 
the eager desire for the particular, his thoughts are not bound 
to any special objects, and he becomes immovable (acala). 
This is the eighth stage where the supreme virtue of 
(anutpattikadharmacaksuh) seeing all things such as they 
are, i.e. rooted in tathata, dominates. The activity of the 
bodhisattva is tainted by no duality or selfishness. He 
is not content with tranquil repose, but is actually engaged 
in the teaching of dharma to others. It is the ninth stage, 
that of the good ones (sadhumati) when all his acts are un- 
selfish, done without desire It is said of Gautama Buddha 
that there is not a single spot in this vast earth where He 
has not in some past life denied his life for the sake of others. 
The bodhisattva of the Mahayana answers to the awakened 
of the Upanisads, the Saviour of Christianity, the super- 
man of Nietzsche, for he helps the world, which is powerless 
to accomplish its end by itself. The bodhisattva becomes 
a tathagata in the tenth stage, a cloud of dharma (dharma- 
megha). Salvation means conformity of life to dharma. 
It is the manifestation of universal love for men and animals. 
Mahayana Buddhism has two stages higher than the arhatship, 
namely, the bodhisattva and the Buddha. The doctrine 
of the bodhisattva is so characteristic of the Mahayana that 
it is sometimes called the Bodhisattvayana, or obtaining 
deliverance by practising the virtues of a bodhisattva. 

The principles of moral life are dana (charity), vlrya 
(fortitude), sila (morality), ksanti (patience), and dhyana 
(meditation), and crowning all, prajna, the home of peace 
and blessing. The severity of monasticism is relaxed. 
Whether you should become a monk or not depends on your 
character and temperament It is possible to reach the 
goal though married. Asceticism and poverty, so common 
in Hinayana ethics, are almost exceptional. To follow 
Buddha’s commands is the way to salvation. Stress is 



BUDDHISM AS A RELIGION 


603 


also laid on faith in God or bhakti. In his commentary 
on the Prajnaparamita, Nagarjuna says : “ Faith is the 
entrance to the ocean of the laws of the Buddha and know- 
ledge is the ship on which one can sail in it.” The Maha- 
yana does not believe in the possibility of emancipation 
through one’s own powers. The help of a saviour is necessary. 
Prayer and worship have a meaning so long as we are on the 
path, though not when we reach the end. The doctrines 
of karma, or the continuous working of our deeds good or 
bad, is tempered by mercy, which finds expression in the 
easier way of salvation by faith. Three classes of Sravakas or 
hearers, Pratyeka Buddhas, and Bodhisattvas are recognised. 
Piety is the means adopted by the first, knowledge by the 
second, devotion to the spiritual weal of others by the 
third . 1 

While the Hlnayana made nirvana attainable by a few 
only through the life of a monk, the Mahayana taught that 
every man could a im at becoming a bodhisattva, and even 
low caste men could attain salvation by the practice of 
virtue and devotion to Buddha. The ethical humanism 
and universalism characteristic of the Mahayana are quite 
in the spirit of early Buddhism. It was Buddha’s mission 
to extend the blessings of salvation to all mankind. “ Go 
ye now, O Bhiksus, for the benefit of the many, for the 
welfare of mankind, out of compassion for the world. Preach 
the doctrine which is glorious in the beginning, glorious 
in the middle and glorious in the end, in spirit as well as 
in letter.” To the Hlnayana morality is essentially a 
negative process, purging the soul of worldly desire and 
evil The bodhisattva ideal is more positive. The doctrine 
specially associated with it is that of parivarta, or turning 
over of ethical merit to the advantage of others. It reminds 
one of the doctrine of vicarious atonement, which proceeds 
on the view of the oneness of life. No man lives to himself 
alone. The good or evil of one affects the whole. 

Whether the metaphysical truth that nothing on earth 
is real, and the ethical law that we should work and suffer 
for our neighbour, can be reconciled or not, is a problem for 
the Madhyamika system. Apparently, the bodhisattva of 
• See AAguttara Nikaya, ii. 245. 

20 


VOL. I 



604 INDIAN PHILOSOPHY 

the Mahayana still harbours the illusion or the moha, that 
he must save the world. 

In the Mahayana the emphasis is not on nirvana, but on 
the obtaining of bodhi or enlightened sainthood. Nirvana is 
freedom of the soul. Gradually it came to mean the happy 
state of concentration centred on eternity. Kramamukti, or 
steady attainment of freedom, is instituted, as in the 
Brahmanical systems to give solace to the heart of man 
which longs for immortal bliss. The existence of Buddhas 
after the end of their earthly career is admitted. The 
idea of nirvana is displaced by a paradise with hell opposed 
to it. On the road to sanctity or the bodhisattvahood, the 
individual enjoys numerous existences on celestial planes. 
Mahayana indulged rather over much in these celestial 
existences and postponed the question of ultimate nirvana. 
When, however, the question is taken up, it is answered in 
the traditional Buddhist manner. It means freedom from 
rebirth, 1 the cutting off of the chain of existence, 2 the 
rooting out of desire, spite and ignorance, 3 or an uncon- 
ditioned being. 4 Since our existences are conditioned, nirvana 
is unconditioned being. It is not non-existence pure and 
simple, but real freedom, where ignorance is overcome. 
What happens to a bodhisattva when he becomes a 
Buddha ? Is he reabsorbed into the absolute being, 
or does he retain his individuality ? The Mahayana is 
not clear on this point, though it inclines mostly to the 
latter alternative. To become a Buddha is to become one 
in essence with the infinite. Asvaghosa describes the 
perfect condition thus : “ It is like the emptiness of space 
and the brightness of the mirror, in that it is true, real and 
great. It completes and perfects all things. It is free 
from the condition of destructibility. In it is reflected every 
phase of life and activity in the world. Nothing goes out 
of it, nothing enters into it, nothing is annihilated, nothing 
is destroyed. It is one eternal soul, no forms of defilement 

1 Punarjanmanivrtti. Asvaghosa, Buddhacarita, xv. 30. 

1 Nagarjuna. 3 Ratnakufa Sutra. 

< Vajracchedika. The Bodhic-aryavatara makes it the giving up of the 
world and egoism. The Ratnamegha accepts this definition. The Praj 'iapa- 
ramita considers nirvana to be profound, fathomless being. Candrakirti iden- 
tifies nirvana with sunyata, or knowledge, which puts an end to all illusions. 



BUDDHISM AS A RELIGION 605 

can defile it ; it is the essence of intelligence." According 
to Asanga, nirvana is the union with the Great Soul of the 
universe, or Mahatman. The Mahayanists are anxious to 
make out that nirvana is not annihilation. 

VII 

The Fall of Buddhism in India 

The vital reason for the disappearance of Buddhism 
from India is the fact that it became ultimately indistinguish- 
able from the other flourishing forms of Hinduism, Vaish- 
navism, fsaivism and Tantrik belief. India had a more 
popular religion, a cult which could satisfy her imagination 
by its picturesqueness. The old Buddhism, which denied the 
very being of God, offered no hope of human immortality and 
looked upon all life as misery, love of life as the greatest 
evil, and the end of man as the extinction of all desire, lost 
its power. Mahayanism was unable to acquire the prestige 
of primitive Buddhism, and so proved weak and vacillating 
in its conflicts with Brahmanical religion. Moreover, it 
grew weaker as it spread wider. It had developed elaborate 
superstitions which dissatisfied the people at large. Through- 
out its conquests it did not aim at the suppression of other 
religions, but tried to suffuse them with its own ethical 
spirit. It accommodated itself to all men and to all time ;, 
with the result that paradises were added and animistic 
ideas introduced. This tendency of compromise was its 
strength as well as its weakness. The spirit which breathes 
in the Xllth Edict of Asoka, that " there should be no 
praising of one’s sect and decrying of other sects, but on 
the contrary a rendering of honour to other sects for what- 
ever cause honour may be due to them,” was the characteristic 
feature of Mahayanism. It adopted the tactics later 
sanctified by St. Paul, who became a Jew to the Jews and 
all things to all men that he might gain a few at least 
In each country Mahayanism had its own form. 1 When 

1 These developments of Mahayana are described in Hackmann's 
Buddhism as a Religion. The historian of Buddhism will have to take into 
account the Avatariisaka, the Dhyana and the Mantra schools, as well as 
the Chinese Tientai and the Japanese Nichiren. 



606 INDIAN PHILOSOPHY 

it gave place to devotion, bhakti and salvation, it opened 
the flood-gates to all forms of superstition. Hideous ex- 
travagances had to be defended with futile dialectic. Mystic 
forms of animism were smuggled into the great sphere of 
truth. Its hospitality to the stories of magic, clairvoyance 
and ghost-seeing weakened it. The disciples surrounded 
with cheap marvels and wonders the lonely figure with a 
serene soul, simple and austere in the yellow robes, walking 
with bared feet and bowed head towards the city of Benares. 
To inspire the outer world with respect for the figure of 
the master, honest propagandists developed rather dishonest 
history. It is impossible to believe Buddha to be the son of 
a mortal father. To make a god of him, stories were invented 
“ Under the overpowering influence of these sickly imagina- 
tions the moral teachings of Gautama have been almost hid 
from view. The theories grew and flourished, each new step, 
each new hypothesis demanded another ; until the whole 
sky was filled with forgeries of the brain, and the nobler and 
simpler lessons of the founder of the religion were smothered 
beneath the glittering mass of metaphysical subtleties .” 1 
The Buddhistic monks lost their old apostolic fervour. The 
monasticism of Buddhism became as bad as any priesthood. 
" Not mendicant monks, devoted to a pure life, but opulent 
churches with fat priests ; not simple discourses calculated 
to awaken the moral and religious consciousness, but subtle 
arguments on discipline and metaphysics, were now what 
Buddhism represented .” 2 The life of Buddhism was choked 
by the mass of superstition, selfishness and sensuality which 
surrounded it. The result was that when Yuan Chwang 
visited India he found the realities of primitive Buddhism 
swamped by the rubbish of myth and legend. The faith 
which was glorious in the days of ASoka, and not without 
inspiration even so late as the time of Kaniska, was lost 
in a wilderness of marvels and miracles such as those of 
endless Buddhas and immaculate conceptions. 

In addition to the degeneration of Buddhism there was 
the stronghold of the past. The life of the people was 
dominated by the Brahmanical faith. Even Buddhism 
could thrive only by accepting Brahmanical gods. Early 

1 Rhys Davids : Buddhism. i Hopkins 



BUDDHISM AS A RELIGION 607 

Buddhism included Indra, Brahma and other divinities. The 
new converts carried into it much of their reverence for the 
old gods. The Hlnayana accepted Brahma, Visnu and 
Narayana in their own names. The Mahayana, we have 
seen, never seriously opposed itself to the Hindu doctrines 
and practices. It elaborated the mythology and spoke of a 
hierarchy of divine grades and capacities, at the head of 
which was Adi Buddha. While the Brahmins looked upon 
Buddha as an incarnation of Visnu, the Buddhists returned 
the compliment by identifying Visnu with Bodhisattva 
Padmapani, called AvalokiteSvara. Religion became a 
private affair, and the Brahmin ascetics were looked upon 
as the brethern of the Buddhist samanas. Brahmanism 
and the Mahayana faith affirmed identical philosophical and 
religious views. The pertinacity characteristic of the Indian 
mind showed itself in a monistic idealism in philosophy 
and freedom of worship in religion (istadevataradhana). 
The Mahayana metaphysics and religion correspond to 
the Advaita metaphysics and theism. In serving the needs 
of a large majority of men, it became only a feeble copy of 
the Bhagavadgita. A gradual process of intellectual absorp- 
tion and modification developed to such an extent as to 
countenance the theory that Mahayanism was only a sectarian 
phase of the great Vaisnava movement . 1 The Hlnayana, 
with its more ascetic character, came to be regarded as a 
sect of Saivism. Buddhism found that it had nothing dis- 
tinctive to teach. When the Brahmanical faith inculcated 
universal love and devotion to God and proclaimed Buddha 
to be an avatar of Visnu, the death knell of Buddhism in 
India was sounded. Buddhism repeated the merits as well 
as the faults of Hinduism. The hand of the immeasurable 
past, with its congenial fancies and inherited beliefs, again 
took hold of the country, and Buddhism passed away by 
becoming blended with Hinduism. 

Buddhism died a natural death in India . 2 It is an inven- 

» The transition of Buddhism into Vaisnavism may be seen in Pun 
of Orissa, where a temple originally dedicated to Gautama Buddha is now 
the dwelling of Krsna, in the form of Jagannatha (Lokanatha). The 
only relic of Buddhism we find there is that men of all castes eat the food 
cooked in the house of God. 

* See Monier Williams: Buddhism, chap. vii. 



608 


INDIAN PHILOSOPHY 


tion of the interested to say that fanatic priests fought 
Buddhism out of existence. It is true that Kumarila and 
Samkara criticised Buddhistic doctrines, but the resistance 
offered by Brahmanism to Buddhism is the natural resistance 
of an old organisation to a new development which came 
to have nothing really new. The violent extermination of 
Buddhism in India is legendary. Buddhism and Brahmanism 
approached each other so much that for a time they 
were confused and ultimately became one. Slow absorption 
and silent indifference, and not priestly fanaticism and 
methodical destruction, are the causes of the fall of 
Buddhism. 

The history of Buddhism is decisive on a crucial problem 
of life. It establishes the enormous difficulty of having a 
pure morality, independent of spiritual sanctions. It failed 
to bring to India a real spiritual deliverance in spite of the 
fact that it laid powerful emphasis on a severely simple life 
of pure goodness. Early Buddhism provided a rallying 
centre for revolting individuals. The Hlnayana' by its 
exaggerations betrayed the central weakness of Buddhist 
systems. The Mahayana, in trying to correct the deficiency 
of the Hlnayana, went to the other extreme and contradicted 
the spirit of Buddha by allowing all sorts of superstitions to 
meddle with spiritual life. Uncompromising devotion to 
the moral law is the secret of the strength of Buddhism, 
and its neglect of the mystical side of man’s nature the cause 
of its failure. 


VIII 

Influence of Buddhism on Indian Thought 

Buddhism has left a permanent mark on the culture of 
India. Its influence is visible on all sides. The Hindu 
faith has absorbed, the best of its ethics. A new respect for 
life, kindness to animals, a sense of responsibility and an 
endeavour after higher life are brought home to the Indian 
mind with a renewed force. The Brahmanical systems, 
as a result of Buddhist influence, cast into the shade those 
parts of their religion which were irreconcilable with humanity 



BUDDHISM AS A RELIGION 609 

and reason. 1 The Mahabharata has echoes of the fine side of 
Buddhism. “ By conquest hatred is increased, and by hatred 
hatred is not destroyed.” 2 After Buddhism it became well- 
nigh impossible for Indian thought to adopt a hopeful view of 
the world. The standards which till then satisfied the mind of 
man could no more be sustained. Human existence is an evil 
and mukti is freedom from being. Later systems of thought 
accept it. Nyaya counted birth (janma) and activity 
(pravrtti) among evils.3 Both good and evil are undesir- 
able since they involve rebirth. We return to the world 
to enjoy the reward or undergo the punishment. To be 
born is simply to die. To be happy is not to be born. The 
revolt of spirit against matter has dominated the history of 
Indian thought since the time of Buddha. All thinkers 
subsequent to him have lived in the shadow of the great 
renunciation. The end of life is symbolised by the robe of 
the sannyasin. The evil of desire is exaggerated. 4 The 
world is bound by desire. 5 Indian thought was forced to 
reckon with the reflections of Buddhism on the instability 
of life and the doctrine of relativity. Some of Buddha’s 
misunderstandings and some of his deeper insights have 
affected the course of subsequent thought. The best things 
of the world die before they are re-born, and even so has 
Buddhism perished in India, to be born again in a refined 
Brahmanism. Buddha to-day lives in the lives of those 
Indians who have not given up their past traditions. His 
presence is felt in all around. Throughout worshipped 
as a god, he has a place in the mythology which is still alive, 
and so long as the old faith remains without crumbling down 
before the corrosive influence of the new spirit, Buddha will 
have a place among the gods of India. His life and teaching 

1 In a work called Acaramayukha, ascribed to one § uiikara, the follow- 
ing five objectionable things are prohibited : (i) oblations to fire. (2) the 

killing of cows for sacrifices, (3) self-torturing austerities, (4) the use of 
flesh in the sacrificial feasts to the manes of the ancestors, and (5) marrying 
the widow of the deceased brother Agnihotrarii gavalambharh sannyasam 
phalapaitrkam devarena sutotpattih kalau panca vivarjayet. See also 
Ninjavasindhu, iii. Another reading has “ aSval.imbharh ” for " agnihotram.” 

1 Udyogaparva, 71. 56 and 63. 3 N.S., 1. 2 ; iv. 55. 

4 Janma duhkham jara duhkham, jaya. duhkham punali punah ; 

Asasah paramarh duhkham, nirasalj paramarh sukham. 

5 Asaya badhyate loke. 



610 INDIAN PHILOSOPHY 

will compel the reverence of mankind, give ease to man) 
troubled minds, gladden many simple hearts, and answer 
to many innocent prayers. 

REFERENCES 

Saddharma Pundanka, S.B.E., xxi. 

Buddhist Mahayana Texts, S.B.E., 1, 

Suzuki : Mahayana Buddhism. 

Suzuki : The Awakening of Faith. 

Coomaraswamy : Buddha and the Gospel of Buddhism. 



CHAPTER XI 


THE SCHOOLS OF BUDDHISM 


Introduction — The four schools of realism and idealism — The Vaibha- 
sikas — Nature of reality — Knowledge — Psychology — The Sautranti- 
kas — Knowledge of the external world — God and nirvana — The Yoga- 
caras — Their theory of knowledge — Nature of Alayavijnana — 
Subjectivism— Criticism of it by ^amkara and Kumlrila — Individual 
self— Forms of knowledge— The Yog.icara theory of the world — 
Avidya and Alaya — Nirvana — Ambiguity of Alayavijnana — The 
Madhyamikas — Literature — The Madhyamika criticism of the Yoga- 
cara — Phenomenalism — Theory of relations — -Two kinds of know- 
ledge — Absolutism— ^unjavada — Nirvana — Ethics — Conclusion. 


I 

The Four Schools of Buddhism 

Buddha used critical analysis as the way to truth. He 
insisted on observation and reasoning. His religion was 
not dogmatic. A saying is attributed to Buddha to the 
effect : “ One must not accept my law from reverence, but 
first try it as gold is tried by fire.” 1 By leaving the meta- 
physical background free for the flight of the speculators, 
Buddha increased the uncertainty about the ultimate foun- 
dations of things. Early Buddhism contained germs 
capable of development along different lines. The same 
thoughts do not always grow in others as they do 
in their founders. So when speculative thinkers stripped 
Buddhism of much that was living and personal, it 

1 Unfortunately, this philosophic spirit declined when large numbers 
accepted Buddhism as a religion. Faith in Buddha’s words increased. 
“ All that the Lord Buddha has said is well said,” said Asoka. In the 
Divyavadana it is declared ** The sky will fall with the moon and stars, 
earth with its mountains and forests will ascend, oceans will be dried up, but 
the Buddhas speak not wrongly.” 

611 

VOL. i 20* 



612 INDIAN PHILOSOPHY 

became reduced to a number of abstract positions from 
which different thinkers according to their inclinations 
developed different systems. Experience according to 
Buddha was the only substantial datum open to us, the 
real existence, the ultimate fact that all thought must 
reckon with. The empiricism of Buddha led to a thorough 
criticism and disintegration of conventional beliefs. The 
empiricism of the Buddhist schools is an intelligent applica- 
tion of the critical method to experience itself. Through 
the pressure of logic rather than of set design, Buddhism 
resulted in different schools of thought. At a very early 
date after Buddha’s death, differences of belief and practice 
began to appear. Even at the time of the Council at Vaisali, 
there were doctrinal disputes which led to the great meeting, 
Mahasangha of the seceders, who themselves split up into 
eight different schools. The Theras who convened the 
Vaisali Council also developed in the second century B.c. 
a number of schools, though their main branch supported 
the Sarvastivada or the realistic theory that everything 
exists. The Pali canon bears witness to the opposed move- 
ments of thought, and Kathavatthu deals with many of 
these sects an schools . 1 Hindu thinkers do not refer to 
these schools of Buddhist thought which arose before the 
first century B.c. According to them there are four chief 
Buddhist schools, of which two belong to the Hinayana and 
two to the Mahayana. The Hinayana schools are the Vai- 
bhasikas and the Sautrantikas, who are realists or Sarvastiva 
dins, believing that there is a self-existent universe actual in 
space and time, where mind holds a place on equal terms with 
other finite things. The Mahayana schools are the Yogacaras, 
who are idealists, and the Madhyamikas. The Yogacaras 
contend that thought is self-creative and all producing. 
It is the ultimate principle, and even the ultimate type 
and form of reality. The Madhyamika philosophy is a 
negative critical system, formulating the metaphysical 
background of the Mahayana Sutras. The Madhyamikas 
are sometimes called Sarvavainasikas or nihilists . 2 


1 See J.R.A.S., 1S91, and Journal of the Pali Text Society, 1904-1905. 

* I-tsing, of the sixth century, says : " Those who worship the bodhisattvas 
and read the Mahayana Sutras are called the Maliayanists (the great), while 



THE SCHOOLS OF BUDDHISM 


613 


The tendencies of the speculative systems of Buddhism, 
though they were long in existence, were formulated and 
codified only after the time of Kaniska. The systems of 
Hindu thought criticise these schools, thus indicating that 
the latter belong to a period earlier than the Hindu systems 
themselves. We shall not be far wrong if we assign them 
to the second century a.d., though some of the more distin- 
guished exponents of this or that school may belong to a 
later era. In the third century after Buddha’s death the 
Vaibhasikas came into prominence, and the Sautrantikas 
in the fourth century after his death. The Madhyamikas, 
according to Aryadeva, came into existence five hundred 
years after Buddha’s death. Asariga, the founder of the 
Yogacara school, is at least as late as the third century a.d. 
Buddhist philosophic thought reached its most vigorous life 
in the fifth, sixth and seventh centuries. 


II 

The Vaibhasikas 

The speculative schools attached to the Hlnayana belong 
to the Sarvastivada or pluralistic realism . 1 The Vaibhasikas 
are so called because they consider the language of the 

those who do not perform deeds are called the HInayanists (the small). 
There are but two kinds of the so-called Mahayana. First, the Madhyamika, 
second, the Yoga ; the former profess that what is commonly called existence 
is in reality non-existence, and every object is but an empty show, like an 
illusion, whereas the latter affirm that there exist no outer things in reality, 
but only inward thoughts, and all things exist only in the mind." (Taka- 
kusu’s I-tsing, p. 15.) 

1 The Sarvastivadins, otherwise called Hetuvadms or causationalists, 
consider seven works to be of importance, of which the chief is Katyayanl- 
putra’s Jndnaprasthdna composed about three hundred years after Buddha’s 
death. The commentary on this called the Mahavibhasa was compiled 
by five hundred arhats under the leadership of Vasumitra, probably after 
the great council under Kaniska. A summary of it is found in Vasubandhu's 
Abhidharmakosa. Yasomitra is the author of the Abhidharmakosavydkhya 
Fragmentary parts of Udanavagga, Dhammapada and Ekottaragama are 
influenced by the Sarvastivada. Asvaghosa’s Buddhacanta, in spite of its 
emphasis on devotion to Buddha and Aryasura’s j alakamdla, seem to belong to 
this school. Bhadanta (third century A D.), Dharmatrata, Ghosaka and 
Buddhadeva are other prominent exponents of this view, though they do 
not agree with one another on all points. 



614 INDIAN PHILOSOPHY 

other schools to be absurd, viruddhabhasa , 1 or because 
they attached themselves to the Vibhasa or the commentary 
on the Abhidharma. They reject the authority of the Sutras 
altogether and acknowledge only the Abhidharma. They 
appeal to experience, which bears unimpeachable witness 
to the nature of things. By experience they mean know- 
ledge produced by direct contact with the object. The world 
is open to perception. It is wrong to think that there is 
no perception of the external world. For without perception 
there can be no inference. We cannot derive a vyapti or 
universal proposition if we do not have perceptions for our 
data. To speak of an inference absolutely independent of 
any objects perceived is opposed to all common sense . 2 So 
objects are of two kinds, the perceived and the inferred, the 
sensible and the cogitable. Though here and there external 
objects may be known to exist by inference, still as a rule 
perception points to their existence. A distinction is made 
between the inner world of ideas and the outer world of 
objects. There is a difference in the way things hang together 
in thought and the way in which they hang together in 
nature. The Vaibhasikas are natural dualists who maintain 
the independent existence of nature and mind. Episte- 
mologically their theory is a naive realism. The mind is 
conscious of objects. Our knowledge or awareness of things 
not mental is no creation, but only discovery. Things are 
given to us. The substance of things has a permanent 
existence throughout the three divisions of past, present and 
future. 

The permanent substances are not the transitory pheno- 
mena, but the elements which underlie them. Some Sar- 
vastivadins maintain the eternal existence of the noumenal 
counterparts of the five skandhas or elements of things. 
They avoid the difficulty of causation, since according to 
them cause and effect refer to two phases of one thing. 
Water is the common substance of ice and steam. The 
phases are momentary, but the substratum is permanent. 
Aryadeva puts this view of cause in the following words : 
“ The cause never perishes, but only changes its name 
when it becomes an effect having changed its state. For 

1 See S.D.S. * Sakalalokanubhavavirodhai ca. 



THE SCHOOLS OF BUDDHISM 615 

example, clay becomes the jar, having changed its state, and 
in this case the name clay is lost and the name jar arises.” 1 
The objects we see cease to exist when they are not 
perceived. They have but a brief duration like a lightning 
flash. The atoms are immediately separated and their 
aggregation is but instantaneous. Things exist for four 
moments, those of production, existence, decay and death. 
Still, it is not perception that makes them into objects. The 
objects have an existence independent of our perception even 
though they cease to exist the moment we cease to perceive. 
The Vaibhasikas, however, as well as the Sautrantikas 
admit the permanent reality of the underlying elements 
or their extra-mental existence. No definite account is 
given of the relation between the underlying reality and the 
phenomenal manifestations. The view of the elements or 
the noumenal counterparts of things is not clear. We are 
often told that even these elements are momentary. They 
are sometimes reduced to mere hypostatised concepts . 2 The 
self called pudgala has no existence apart from the elements 
of personal life. The unity of the individual is a fiction for 
the continuous flow of mental states. The theory rests on 

1 Compare the view elaborated in Abhidharmakosabhasya : “ Are we to 
think that wood perishes by contact with flames ? — Yes, for we no longer 
see the wood when it is burnt, and no reasoning is worth the evidence of 
our senses. No — it is a matter of reasoning ; for even if we no longer see 
the wood, that may be the outcome of the fact that it perishes of itself and 
ceases to be renewed. The non-existence of the wood which you say is 
caused by fire is a pure nothingness, a nonentity, and nonentity cannot 
be an effect and cannot be caused. Besides, if destruction or non-existence 
which succeeds existence had sometimes a cause, it would always, like births, 
have a cause. And you willingly admit that flame, sound and thought 
are momentary by nature " (iv. 2). “ If things perish without cause from 

their very nature, as objects thrown into the air fall, then they must perish 
in the moment of their birth, and they cannot exist beyond the moment 
in which they actually receive being ; for if destruction, being without cause, 
does not take place at the very birth of the thing, it will not take place 
later, for the thing remains what it is ’’ (ibid.). If you say the thing ripens, 
grows older, etc., what grows older, what changes, is a series. The notion 
of change is contradictory. “ That the same thing should become other 
than it is is absurd. That the thing should remain the same and its 
characters become different is absurd ” (ibid. iv. 2). If things are momen- 
tary, then they perish of themselves without any cause. A flame dies because 
it is momentary and not because it is blown out. We cannot destroy what 
exists, nor can we destroy what does not exist. 

* See the Journal of the Pali Text Society, 1913-1914, p. 133. 



616 


INDIAN PHILOSOPHY 


naturalistic assumptions, and when strictly developed takes 
us to materialism or sensationalism. Realising that we are 
dealing with transitory phenomena, the Sautrantikas argue 
that the underlying substances are inferred by us and not 
directly perceived. 

The Vaibhasikas and the Sautrantikas admit the reality of 
an outer world. Objects are distinguished by them into the 
bahya, or the external, and the abhyantara, or the internal. 
Under the former they have bhuta, or the elements, and 
bhautika, or objects belonging to the elements. Under 
the latter they have citta, or intelligence, and caitta, or 
those belonging to intelligence . 1 

There are only four elements, and not five : earth, which 
is hard ; water, which is cool ; fire, which is warm ; and air, 
which is mobile. The fifth element, akasa, is not recognised. 
The external objects are the results of the gathering together 
of the ultimate atoms according to their capacity. The 
atomic theory is accepted by the Vaibhasikas and the 
Sautrantikas. All objects are ultimately reducible to atoms. 
The Vaibhasikas maintain that the atom has six sides, 
and yet is one, for the space within the atom cannot be 
divided. They also hold that the atoms can be perceived in 
a mass, though we cannot see them singly, even as we see a 
mass of hair, but not a single hair . 2 An atom is the smallest 


1 We may take note of the subjective and the objective classifications 
noticed in Vasubandhu’s AbhidharmakoSa. The subjective classification is 
simple. We have the five skandhas or constituents of being, the twelve 
ayatanas or locations, and the eighteen dhatus or bases. The objective 
classification deals with two kinds of objects, the asaiiiskrta dharmas (non- 
composite) and the samskrta dharmas (composite). Of the non-composite 
dharmas, which are not produced by things, which are self-existent and 
exempt from change, i.e. origin, growth and destruction, there are three : 
(i) Pratisaiiikhyanirodha, (2) apratisaiiikhyanirodha, (3) akaSa or space. 
Of the composite dharmas there are four kinds : (1) The eleven rupa- 

dharmas (rupa equals matter), (2) the one citta (mind), (3) the forty-six 
caitta dharmas, and ( 4 ) the fourteen cittaviprayukta, or non-mental com- 
posites. The seventy-two composite dharmas and the three non-composite 
dharmas exhaust all the things. The word dharma means a number of 
things in Buddhism, such as law, rule, faith, religion, worldly phenomena, 
things, state : here it is used for any existing object. See Sogen : Systems of 
Buddhistic Thought. 

1 The Nyaya Sutras hold that the atom is transcendental, not perceptible 
to the senses. N.S., ii. i. 36; iv 2. 14. 



THE SCHOOLS OF BUDDHISM 


617 


particle of rupa, according to Vasubandbu. 1 It cannot be 
placed anywhere or trampled on or seized or attracted. It 
is neither long nor short, neither square nor round, neither 
curved nor straight, neither high nor low. It is indivisible, 
unanalysable, invisible, inaudible, untastable and intangible. 3 
The atoms cannot penetrate one another. The Vaibhasikas 
and the Sautrantikas do not admit double or triple atoms, 
though they allow indefinite atomic aggregations. Compound 
substances are composites of primary elements. Bodies 
which are the objects of sense are aggregates of atoms-. 
Material things which offer resistance to sense-organs are 
collections of the fourfold substrata of rupa, colour, smell, 
taste and touch. The unit possessing this fourfold quality 
is the paramanu, or the ultimate atom which defies analysis. 
The paramanus become perceptible when they combine. 
The perceptible atomic unit is the anu, which is a combination 
of paramanus. The atoms are the same in all the elements 
possessing the qualities of earth, air, fire and water. Though 
material things have the qualities of the four different ele- 
ments, yet it happens that in some cases some elements 
display their active energy, while others are in a potential 
condition. In hard metal the earth element, in the liquid 
stream the water element, in the burning flame the fire element 
predominates. The Sarvastivadins distinguish two worlds, 
the bhajanaloka, the universe as the abode of things, and 
the sattvaloka, the world of living beings. The first serves 
the second. The Cittaviprayukta dharmas are composite 
energies distinct from matter and mind, such as prapti and 
aprapti. They are not actual, but only potential and become 
actually existent when they attach themselves to a mental or 
a material basis. 

The non-composite elements are three : akasa, which 

is free from all distinction and limitless. It is an eternal, 
all-pervading positive substance. 3 It is, though it is devoid 
of form (rupa), and is not a material thing (vastu). 
Apratisamkhyanirodha is the non-perception of dharma, 
caused by the absence of pratyaya or conditions, and not 

* Paramanu is the minutest form of rupa. It cannot be pierced through 
or picked up or thrown away. 

1 Abhidharmamahavibhasa. J This is also the view of the Nyaya. 



618 INDIAN PHILOSOPHY 

produced by knowledge . 1 It is intense concentration on 
one subject, so that all other influences sink into silence. 
Pratisamkyanirodha is the positive fruition of transcendental 
knowledge, the highest ideal of the Sarvastivadin. The 
nirvana of this school is neither quite the same as existence 
conditioned by the skandhas nor different from it. Since 
the Vaibhasikas recognise the permanent existence of the 
atoms of the skandhas, nirvana cannot be a condition alto- 
gether independent of the skandhas. Samkara criticises 
the three non-composite or asamskrta dharmas as avastu 
(non-substantial), abhavamatram (only negatively discern- 
nible), and nirupakhya (devoid of form ). 3 It is true that 
they are indefinable, but that does not mean they are 
unreal. 

The true instruments of knowledge open to us are per- 
ception and conception. Perception (or grahana) gives us 
truth, since it is free from any imagination or kalpana. But 
it only gives us indefinite presentations. Conception or 
cognition (adhyavamya) does not give us knowledge, though 
it is definite, for it is ideal or imaginary. Perception is 
not illusory, but indefinite. Conception is illusory, though 
definite. An absolutely undetermined object of perception 
does not exist. It is indeed difficult to distinguish the given 
and the ideal aspects of the objects of knowledge. There 
seems to be an inconsistency here in the Vaibhasika theory, 
for if perception is so indefinite, how can we say that it 
gives us knowledge of the reality of things ? It may be 
that through perception we bump against reality, and feel 
that there is something real. But to ascertain the nature 
of the object with which we come into collision, inference 
is necessary. 

The perceiver or upalabdhr is vijnana and the substratum 
of consciousness (citta or mind) is permanent. Memory 
is a cittadliarma, or a quality of citta. The sense-objects 
are rupa (colour or form), taste, smell, touch and sound. 
Answering to these five sense-objects, we have five sense- 
organs. After grasping the external objects, the indriyas 
arouse the citta or mind and excite vijnana or consciousness. 
These indriyas which grasp the object are material in their 

1 Vasubandhu. 1 V.S. Commentary, ii. 2. 22-24. 



THE SCHOOLS OF BUDDHISM 


619 


nature. Each has two parts, the principal and the auxiliary. 
In the case of sight, the optic nerve is the principal and the 
eyeball is the auxiliary. There are said to be six kinds of 
discrimination according to the five sense-organs and the 
sixth mind, which is the internal sense. By means of the 
sixth sense of mind, we know not only the particular colours, 
but colour as such or sound as such. Citta, according to 
Vasubandhu, is one with mind, vijnana or discrimination. 1 
There is no soul distinct from vijnana or citta. 

According to this school Buddha is an ordinary human 
being, who, after attaining the qualified nirvana by his 
Buddhahood and final nirvana by his death, lost his being. 
The only divine element in Buddha is his intuitive knowledge 
of the truth, which he attained without the aid of others. 


Ill 

The Sautrantikas 

The second school of the Hinayana is that of the 
Sautrantikas. 2 3 The Sautrantikas admit the extra-mental 
existence of the phenomenal world. Only we do not have a 
direct perception of it. We have mental presentations 
through which we infer the existence of external objects. 
They must exist because there cannot be perception without 
an object of perception. 3 

Madhava describes the arguments by which the Sautranti- 

1 The mind is called citta because it observes (cetati), manas because 
it considers (manyatc), and vijnana because it discriminates (vijanate). 
Abhidharmakosa, 2. 

1 Of the origin of the term Sautrantika, Madhava says: "The name 
Sautrantika arose from the fact that the venerated Buddha said to some 
of his disciples, who asked what was the ultimate purport (anta) of the 
aphorism (sutra), be Sautrantikas” (S.D.S., p. 332). It may well be that 
the Sautrantikas are so called because of their adherence to the Sutta 
I’itaka, or the section consisting of the discourses of Buddha to the rejection 
of the two other Pitakas. The Sautrantikas take their stand on the sutras. 
There are two divisions among them, those who reject every other appeal 
than that to the word of the master, and those who admit other proofs. 
Kumlralabdha , a contemporary of Nagarjuna, is said to be the founder of 
the system. Dharmottara, the logician, and Yasomitra the author of the 
commentary on Yasubandhu’s Abhidharmakosa, are followers of the school 

3 Locke’s Essay, iv. 4. 3. 



620 


INDIAN PHILOSOPHY 


kas infer the existence of an external world in his Sarvadar- 
sana-samgraha : “ Cognition must ultimately have some 

object since it is manifested in duality. ... If the object 
proved were only a form of cognition, it should manifest itself 
as such, and not as an external object.” Modern logic might 
look upon this as a confusion between objectivity and exter- 
nality. If it is said that the internal principle manifests 
itself as if it were something external, the Sautrantikas reply : 
“ This is untenable, for if there be no external objects, there 
being no genesis of such, the comparison, ‘ as if they were 
external,’ is illegitimate. No man in his senses would say 
Vasumitra looks like the son of a childless mother.” 1 We 
infer the objective existence from certain properties, even 
as “ nourishment is inferred from a thriving look, as nation- 
ality from language and as emotion from expression.” 4 
Again : “ Consciousness by itself is everywhere alike, and if 
it were all, the world must be one. We have, however, 
now blue, now red. These must be due to differences in 
the objects themselves.” The varieties of forms of conscious- 
ness indicate the existence of external objects. Besides, 
“ those things which while a thing exists manifest them- 
selves only at times must depend on something else than 
that thing.” Consciousness manifests itself only at times 
as blue and so forth. Again : “ That is knowledge of the 
subject (alayavijnana) which concerns the ego. And 
that is knowledge of the object (pravrttivijnana) which 
manifests blue, etc.” Lastly, this external world does not 
rise into being at our will. To account for the involuntary 
nature of sense-perceptions, we must admit the reality of 
a world able to produce sound, touch, colour, taste, smell, 
pleasure, pain, etc. The world is therefore external to 
consciousness. Our belief in it is based on inference. We 
may ask whether its existence is so absolutely self-evident 
and demonstrable that it can resist the shock of doubt. 
As Descartes puts the objection, “ may it not be that some 
malignant spirit is playing upon our minds and awaking in 
them the ideas of things that have no reality.” We then 
seem to be brought to the Yoganara view that the immediate 
objects of consciousness of which we have any certainty 
1 p. 27. • p. 28. 



THE SCHOOLS OF BUDDHISM 621 

are our ideas. No lying spirit can deceive us about them. 
When once the unity of thought and being is broken up, 
when we separate the consciousness of self from the immediate 
consciousness of the world, both of them lose their life. 
The Madhyamika theory consistently disposes of both self 
and not-self, and leads us to an absolute unity lifted beyond 
the distinction of self and not-self. 

While holding that there can be no perceptual knowledge 
of objects without external objects, the Sautrantikas contend 
that these outer objects are only momentary. All things 
are momentary . 1 If the objects which determine the forms 
of consciousness are only momentary, how do we get the 
illusion of permanent objects? “The forms of the object 
penetrate one after the other into the understanding ; the 
illusion of simultaneity is caused by the swiftness of the 
proceeding. Just so as an arrow passes through the eight 
leaves of a flower, as it were, at the same time, and a fire- 
brand appears as a circle.” The Sautrantikas are hypo- 
thetical dualists, or cosmothetic idealists, to use Hamilton’s 
expression. They deny any immediate knowledge of an 
independent world, but admit the reality of it to account 
for our perceptions and images. Through conscious presenta- 
tions objects are apprehended. There is no doubt that so 
far as psychological fact is concerned, the Vaibhasikas are 
on better ground. When we perceive, the Sautrantika 
says we have an idea or presentation. The unsophisticated 
individual whose mind is not debauched by psychological 
learning confirms the Vaibhasika account when he says 
that he perceives a tree and not an idea from which he 
infers the tree. To import the results of psychological 
analysis into the naive mind of the experiencing individual 
is to commit the psychologist’s fallacy. The individual sees 
the tree which is not himself. To say that he apprehends 
an idea which he later refers to an external thing is a distor- 
tion of plain facts. Modern psychology confirms the Vai- 
bhasika theory that perception is an act of consciousness, 
which stands in relation to a non-mental existent physical 
object. 

Dharmottara in his Nyayabindutlka, a commentary 
■ S.S.S.S. iii. 3, if>. 



622 INDIAN PHILOSOPHY 

on Dharmakirti’s Nyayabindu, regards sariiyak-jnana or 
right knowledge as the sole means for the accomplishment 
of all desires a man may have. While the truth of a judgment 
consists in its agreement with the objects, the test of truth 
is successful activity. All knowledge is purposive. It starts 
with the presentation of an idea and terminates with the 
fulfilment of the desire that is prompted by it. As both 
perception and inference help us in the realisation of our 
desires, they are valid forms of knowledge. Only in per- 
ception, the presentation is direct, while in inference it is 
mediated by the linga or the reason. Dreams and illusions 
are examples of wrong knowledge. 

Admitting the reality of the external world, the 
Sautrantika goes on to explain the process of knowledge. 
Knowledge arises on the basis of four conditions, which 
are: (i) data, or alambana; (2) suggestion, or samanantara; 
(3) medium, or sahakari; and (4) dominant organ, or adhi- 
patirupa. “ From blue data, the form of blue arises in 
the understanding, which manifestation is styled a cognition 
(jfiana). From suggestion there is a revival of old know- 
ledge. The restriction to the apprehension of this or that 
object arises from the medium, light, as one condition and 
the dominant organ as the other.” 1 Dharmakirti, in his 
Nyayabindu, defines perception as a presentation deter- 
mined exclusively by the object and free from all mental 
impositions (kaipana). Obviously it is nirvikalpa or in- 
determinate knowledge, since savikalpa or determinate 
knowledge involves the conceptual activity of the mind. 
Dharmakirti is of opinion that names and relations are 
imposed by the mind, while the senses reveal the objects 
accurately unless they are themselves perverted by organic 
or extraneous causes. This pure perception, free from all 
traces of conceptual activity, is said to give us the object 
in its own nature (svalaksanam). It is, however, difficult 
to decide in our actual perceptions, which are by no means 
pure, what are the respective contributions of the object 
and the mind. 

The atomic theory is accepted by the Sautrantikas with 
very little difference from the Vaibhasikas. For the 

* S.D.S. p. 30. 



THE SCHOOLS OF BUDDHISM 623 

Sautrantika, akasa is tke same as the ultimate atom, since 
both are notions and nothing more. 1 

In opposition to the Vaibl.asikas and the Madhyamikas, 
the Sautrantikas maintain that thought can think itself, 
and that we can have self-consciousness. 2 Though the end 
of a finger cannot touch itself, a lamp illuminates itself 
and another. 3 This theory is quite compatible with 

realism. 

Yasomitra, the Sautrantika and the commentator of the 
Abhidharmakosa of Vasubandhu, dealing with the reality of 
God, argues: “ The creatures are created neither by Isvara, 
nor by Purusa (spirit), nor by Pradhana (matter). If God 
was the sole cause, whether the God was Mahadeva, Vasudeva 
or another, whether spirit or matter, owing to the simple 
fact of the existence of such a primordial cause, the world 
would have been created in its totality at once and at the 
same time. For it cannot be admitted that there should be 
a cause without an effect ; but we see the creatures coming 
into existence not simultaneously, but successively, some 
from wombs, some from buds. Hence we have got to 
conclude that there is a series of causes, and that God is not 
the sole cause. But it is objected that the diversity of 
causes is due to the volition of the Deity ; ‘ Let now such 
and such a creature be born, let another creature be born 
in such and such a way.’ It is in this way that is to be 
explained the phenomenon of the appearance of creatures, 
and that it is proved that God is the cause of them all. 
To this we reply that to admit several acts of volition in God 
is to admit several causes, and that to make this admission 
is to destroy the first hypothesis, according to which there 
is one primordial cause. Moreover, this plurality of causes 
could not have been produced except at one and the same 
time, since God, the source of the distinct acts of volition 
which have produced this variety of causes, is Himself alone 
and indivisible. The sons of Sakya hold that the evolution 
of the world has no beginning.” < 

1 S.S.S.S., iii. 3. 5. • Svasaravitti. 

3 Bodhicaryavatara, ix. 15. 

4 Quoted in Nariman, Literary History 0 f Sanskrit Buddhism, pp. 284— 

285. 



624 


INDIAN PHILOSOPHY 


IV 

The Yogacaras 

Aryasanga or Asariga and his younger brother Vasu- 
bandhu, the teacher of Dignaga, founded the Vijnanavada, 
or the idealist view of the Yog&cara. 1 

The school is called Yogacara, since it declares that 
the absolute truth or bodhi manifested in the Buddhas is 

1 Originally an adherent of the Sarvastivada school, Asariga became 
the chief exponent of the Yogacara doctrine. He explains his doctrine 
in his Yogucarabhumisastra, Mahayanasutralariikara, a work consisting of 
memorial verses in various metres, and a commentary on the latter by 
himself. Vasubandhu is said to have lived about the last quarter of the 
fourth century. Takakusu and Jacobi assign him to the latter part of the 
fifth century. Other opinion puts him circa a.d. 300. Vasubandhu's pupil, 
Gunaprabha, was the guru or teacher of Sri Harsa, the king of Kanouj 
and the friend of Yuan Chwang. This fact favours Jacobi’s opinion that 
Vasubandhu lived about the second half of the fifth centurv. Vasubandhu 
is distinguished for his profound learning and perverseness of thought. He 
is the author of Ablndharmakosa, a Hinayana work. In later life he was 
converted by his brother Asariga to the Mahayana doctrine, and wrote 
several commentaries on the Maha\ ana texts. Asvaghosa is also a follower 
of the Yogacara school. His chnf work is Mahayanasraddhotpada, or 
The Awakening of Faith in the Mahayana (translated by Suzuki in the 
Open Court Series). Aivaghosa’s autho ship c.f this work is not beyond 
doubt. He is a Brahmin of Eastern India, who lived in the first 
century a.d. He is said to have been the spiritual adviser of the famous 
Kusan king, Kaniska. (The date of Kaniska is unsettled, some, Boyer, 
Oldenberg, and Haraprasiid Sestri, putting it in the first century a.d. and 
others first century b.c. Sir R. G. Bhandarkar is of opinion that Kaniska 
lived in the third century a.d. J.R.A.S., Bombay Branch, vol. xx.) Asva- 
ghosa is also the author of Buddhacanta. The Lanka vatarasutra describes 
a visit paid to Ravana in Ceylon by Buddha, who answered a number of 
questions according to the doctrine of the Yogacara school. It is an 
important text oi this school, though Madhyamika tenets are not wanting 111 
it. The Abhisamayalaihkaraloka and the Bodhisattvabhumi are other works 
of the same school. Among the distinguished thinkers of this persuasion 
may be mentioned Nanda, Dignaga, Dharmapala and £ilabhadra. The 
last was Professor at Nalanda, from whom Yuan Chwang acquired the 
knowledge of Buddhist philosophy. Dignaga, the author of Nyayabindu- 
subhasitasaihgraha, Pramanasamuccaya, was a South Indian philosopher and 
pupil of Asanga or Vasubandhu. Dignaga is regarded by some as a con- 
temporary of Gunaprabha, and assigned to a.d. 520 to 600. It is not improb- 
able that Kalidasa refers to him in his Meghaduta, and if so, he must have 
flourished about the time of Kalidasa. The words are : Adrelj srrigam 
harati — dignaganam pathi panliar.ui sthulahastavalepan. Suguira says that 
Dignaga was a native of Andhra. See his Hindu Logic as preserved m China 
and Japan, p. 33. 



THE SCHOOLS OF BUDDHISM 


625 


attainable only by those who practise Yoga. The title 
Yogacara brings out the practical side of the philosophy, 
while Vijnanavada brings out its speculative features. 
The principle of critical analysis is applied not only to the 
individual ego and the material objects, but also to the 
dharmas, or the elements of things, and an idealism which 
reduces all reality to thought relations is developed. 

The representative theory of perception adopted by 
the Sautrantika takes us naturally to the subjectivism of 
the Yogacara. Our data in knowledge are a disordered 
medley, which the Sautrantikas say come to us from with- 
out, supplied by things which exist. We do not know what 
these things are. If objects of our knowledge are only 
ideas in our mind, which have a representative character, 
since they are referred to objects beyond themselves and 
are considered to be images and effects of things existing out- 
side the thinking subject, it is difficult to comprehend their 
nature. They are said to be symbolic of something beyond 
themselves. If we start with ideas unreferred, their later 
reference to objects need not be true. The existence of an 
outer world is a fiction. Even if it exists it can never be 
known. We can never get behind the screen and know 
what causes the ideas. “ Our senses testify not, but that 
we have certain ideas. And if we draw conclusions from 
the testimony which the premises will not support, we deceive 
ourselves.” 1 When the Sautrantika maintains that we 
have ideas and through them we infer things, it is clear 
that if there were external bodies we cannot know them, 
and if they were not, even then we will have as much reason 
to think they were.* If a cause is necessary for ideas, that 
cause need not necessarily be the outer w'orld. Even with 
regard to ideas which are not voluntarily produced, all 
that we can say is that there must be some cause. The 
Sautrantika does not face the consequences of his representa- 
tive theory of knowledge, since he starts with the assumption 
of two substances. 

The task of the Yogacara was like that of Berkeley, to 
expose the baseless and self-contradictory character of the 

1 Reid : Works, p. 286. 

• Berkeley : Principles 0/ Human Knowledge, section 7. 



626 INDIAN PHILOSOPHY 

unknown absolute matter of the Sautrantika, and persuade 
us to drop all ideas of such an external existence. We have 
no warrant for supposing the cause of all ideas to be material 
substance. Matter is an idea and nothing more. Things 
are clusters of sensations. The objects of knowledge are 
either ideas actually imprinted on the sense, or those per- 
ceived by attending to passions and operations of the mind. 
External objects independent of consciousness are not in- 
telligible. The Yogacaras ask : “ Does the external object 
apprehended by us arise from any existence or not ? It 
does not arise from an existence, for that which is generated 
has no permanence ; nor does it not arise from an existence, 
for what has not come into being has no existence.” 1 Again, 
“ Is the external object a simple atom or a complex body ? 
It cannot be the latter, for we do not know whether it is 
part or whole that is apprehended. It cannot be an atom, 
since it is supersensible.” We cannot cognise atoms, 
and about the aggregates of atoms we cannot say whether 
the aggregates are different or not from the atoms. If 
they are different from the atoms, they can no longer be 
regarded as composed of atoms. If they are not diiferent 
from atoms, i.e. if they are one with them, they cannot be 
the causes of the mental representations of gross bodies. 
Besides, if the objects are momentary, then they last only 
an instant, and knowledge which is an effect can arise only 
after the cause ceases to be, and so it can never arise at all. 
At the moment of cognition the object would have ceased 
to be. It comes to this, that for perceiving an object we need 
not have an object. Even if objects exist they become 
objects of knowledge through ideas which take the form of 
objects. Since the latter are all we need, there is no necessity 
to assume external objects. Since we are conscious of ideas 
and things together, the two are not different, All the 
properties we know, length, size, taste, etc., are subjective. 
There are no objects independent of us, and when we speak 
of such we use words only. Outer objects are non-existent. 
The apparent phenomena around us are produced by mental 
operations within. They appear and disappear like swiftly 
vanishing clouds. The so-called outward things, stars and 

« S.D.S., p. 24. 



THE SCHOOLS OF BUDDHISM 


627 


planets, are really mental experiences arising in an established 
order which may somehow be counted upon. 1 We read into 
external nature what exists only in our own minds. If we 
ask for the explanation for the actual varieties of ideas, the 
Yogacara refers us to the impressions left by previous ideas. 
Our dream experiences are full of ideas which arise from 
previous mental impressions without any external objects. 
Even so is waking experience to be explained. 2 All dharmas 
or things and their qualities are constituents of consciousness. 
Our consciousness by its two functions of khyati or perception 
and vastuprativikalpa or interpretation develops the world 
of experience. The Yogacara traces the activity of conscious- 
ness to the beginningless instinctive tendencies working in it.3 
The Yogacaras are supporters of Vijnanavada. They 
deny the real existence of all except vijhana or consciousness. 
"Sarvam buddhimayam jagat;” the whole world is ideal. 
Whatever we may say about the natural world said to be 
beyond, internal experience cannot be denied. Our know- 
ledge may not be a record of the truths of nature, but nobody 
can deny its existence. Knowledge is. Its presence is 
potent. This theory has the support of early Buddhism, 
which holds that all that happens is the result of thought 
and is made up of it. “ All that we are is the result of what 
we have thought ; it is founded on our thoughts ; it is made 
up of our thoughts.” The psycho-physical organism which 


1 Cf. Einstein’s theory of relativity, which makes out that even length is 
not an absolute property of the rod, but depends on the relative velocity and 
position of the rod and the observer. 

’ According to the logic of Dignaga, existence means the capacity for 
producing an effect, arthakriyakaritva. External things are not real. A 
permanent thing is inactive. Does it possess, at the moment when it was 
accomplishing its present act, the power to accomplish its past and future ? 
If so, it will accomplish them all at once. For it is not usual that anything 
capable of an act should postpone. If not, it will never accomplish them, 
as a stone which cannot produce a bird now will never produce one. If 
it is said that the permanent thing produces such and such an effect by 
reason of the co-operation of other factors, then if the factors are external, 
the latter are active ; if they give a new power to the permanent things, 
then the first being who lacked this capacity perished, and a new being 
possessing this capacity is born. It is difficult to attribute to permanent 
things identical with themselves a successive activity, so they are all 
transitory. 

J See Lafikavatara Sutra. 



628 INDIAN PHILOSOPHY 

continues after the death of a man is said to be created in 
the matrix by the rebirth of consciousness. Since the 
Yogacaras do not admit the dependence of consciousness 
on external objects and hold that it is self-subsistent, their 
view is called the Niralambanavada. The distinction of 
material and mental dharmas disappears, since all dharmas 
are mental. 

When the Madhyamika argues that even vijnana is 
unreal, since we cannot have consciousness without an object 
of which we are conscious, the Yogacara replies : “ If all 
is nothing, then nothing itself becomes the criterion of truth, 
and the Madhyamika has no right to discuss with others of a 
different way of thinking. He who accepts nothing as real can 
neither prove his position nor disprove his opponent’s case.” 1 
When the Madhyamika considers all things to be sunya or 
void, even this absence of characteristics must designate a 
something. The Bodhisattvabhumi puts it thus : ‘‘For sunya 
(vacuity) to be a justifiable position, we must have firstly 
the existence of that which is empty, and then the non- 
existence of that by the absence of which it is empty ; 
but if neither exists, how can there be a vacuity ? ” We 
wrongly superimpose the notion of a serpent on a rope. 
The rope exists, the serpent does not. Therefore the rope 
is void of serpent. Similarly, the qualities and characteristics 
as form, etc., commonly attributed to things may not exist. 
Though the denotable properties may not exist, the substra- 
tum exists. The distinctions of jnana and jneya, knowledge 
and knowable, are based on something. The simile of a 
dream is used to illustrate this position. The visions of 
a dream are independent of anything to be seen. The 
elephants we see in a dream do not exist. They are products 
of mind wrongly made objective. The form akrti of elephant 
is taken by the thought under the influence of the impression 
(vasana) left by the visual knowledge. Even the knowledge 
that we touch an elephant is a knowledge assumed by thought. 
Since there is really no knowable, there is really no knowledge. 
There is no matter rupa, nothing outside the thought, yet for 
all these imaginary entities also there must be some sub- 
stratum, and that accoiding to the Yogacaras is vijnana. 

1 S.S.S.S., iii. 3-4. 



THE SCHOOLS OF BUDDHISM 629 

The Yogacaras are frankly idealistic. What is, is merely 
one homogenous vijnana, which is not an abstract, but a 
concrete reality. The thinking being becomes conscious of 
its existence and identity of the subject only by knowing 
objects. The whole system of facts is placed within the 
individual consciousness. The alaya, with its internal duality 
of subject and object, becomes itself a little world. It is 
confined to its own circle of modifications. The world of 
reality is deprived of its independence and reduced to a mere 
dance of ideas or thought relations. The alaya, which is a 
continually changing stream of consciousness, is contrasted 
with Atman, which is immutable, though the Yogacaras are 
not clear about the exact significance of the alaya. The 
alaya is sometimes the actual self, developing and ever-grow- 
ing. 1 It receives impressions and develops the germs deposited 
in it by karma, or experience, and is continually active. It is 
not merely the superficial self, but the great storehouse of con- 
sciousness which the yogins find out by meditation. Through 
meditation and other practices of self-examination, we realise 
that our waking or superficial consciousness is a fragment of a 
wider whole. Every individual has in him this vast whole 
of consciousness, the great tank, of the contents of which 
the conscious self is not fully aware. 2 Our personal con- 
sciousness knows but a small fraction of the sum total of our 
conscious states, the alayavijnana. There are indications 
that the alayavijnana was sometimes used in the sense of 
the absolute self. It is said to be without any origination, 
existence and extinction, utpadasthitibhangavarjam. 3 It 
is the permanent background of the endless variety of feelings 
and ideas, common to all minds. It alone exists ; indi- 
vidual, intellectual products are mere phenomena, phases of 
the alaya. It is the sole foundation of the false belief in 
the existence of the world. All things in the universe are 
in it. Particular phenomena are manifestations of the alaya 
according to the number and nature of the conditions. We 

* Cf. Gentile’s neo-idealism with its insistence on thought and the his- 
torical character of reality. 

1 The Yogacaras accepted the doctrine of the subconscious which 
William James has called the most important step taken by psychology 
in recent years. 

I Lahkavatara Sutra. 



630 INDIAN PHILOSOPHY 

in our ignorance break up this consciousness into several 
elements. “ What is of the nature of consciousness is indeed 
indivisible, but by those whose vision is confused it seems to 
be, as it were, differentiated into the perceived object, the 
perceiving subject and the perception itself.” 1 Again, “ there 
exists in reality only one thing, and that is of the nature of 
the intelligent principle of consciousness, and its oneness is 
not destroyed by the varied character of its manifestations.” 2 
Mana, the means of knowledge, meya, the object of know- 
ledge, and phala, the resulting knowledge, are distinctions 
within the whole of vijnana. Objects arise from the succes- 
sive modifications of mind. The Lankavatara Sutra says : 
“ Cittam exists; not the objects perceptible by sight. 
Through objects visually cognised, cittam manifests itself in 
body in one’s objects of enjoyment, residence, etc. It is called 
the alaya of men.” Vijnana constitutes the whole universe. 
Things of nature are only the other of it. Vijnana is the 
whole, itself and the other. We see the gradual transition 
from the psychological to the logical self. All things are 
related to vijnana. There is nothing outside thought. 
There cannot be any absolute opposition between thinking 
subject and the world of objects which he thinks. Thought 
is the beginning and the end of all knowledge. Remove 
thought, all will vanish into nothing. The individual who 
thinks is not merely an individual, he is part of all he knows, 
and all he knows is part of him. The reality outside know- 
ledge, the thing in itself of Kant, is a creation of the mind. 
The idea of something else behind thought causing it, is 
simply another thought and no more. Thought is the 
only reality we have to reckon with. It is that which knows 
and the object which it knows. If this is the view of the 
Yogacara, then the external world becomes a negation 
or the non-ego, which a thinking being sets up within, and 
in conflict with which it attains to consciousness. The 
priority and productivity of thought is the central thesis 
here Thought is the structure as well as the stuff of reality. 
It presupposes no datum or reality external to itself, call 
it what you will, space or nature. It knows only so far 
as it thinks itself to be the object of its knowledge. Thought 
* S.S.S.S., iii. 2—4. ■ S.S.S.S., iii. 2-6. 



THE SCHOOLS OF BUDDHISM 


631 


contains everything in itself. If the object constituted by 
the subject detaches itself from the subject, and shuts itself 
up in impenetrability, then it is eviscerated of its reality. 
In this sense thought is no other than God. The Yogacara, 
when he teaches the immanent existence of all things in 
vijnana, when he makes out that the alaya is common to 
all individuals, that while the phenomenal self differs, the 
transcendental self is the same in all, is adopting this view. 
Alaya vijnana is the absolute totality, originality and crea- 
tivity, unconditioned itself by time and space, which are 
modes of existence of the concrete and empirical individuality. 
Things of nature are deposits from the great sea of thought. 
They can all be taken back into its transparent unity and 
simplicity, which is the mother sea of consciousness, out 
of which things arise and into which they again return. It 
is the living base from which come the members which again 
withdraw themselves. It is the highest or perfect knowledge 
in which no thing is known, no difference is felt. It is 
always the same, and therefore perfect. Alaya becomes 
the universal subject, and not the empirical self. 

While then, metaphysically, all is due to the one reality 
which is thought, the Yogacaras sometimes reduce the 
matter opposed to the empirical individual to a mere 
sensation or collection of sensations. The world is not 
merely the contents of this or that consciousness. Solidity, 
distance, hardness and resistance are not mere ideas of 
the finite mind. By maintaining that they are, the 
Yogacara’s view becomes crudely subjectivist. It cannot 
account for the world organism which precedes the birth of 
human consciousness. Nor can it account for the seeming 
reality of a common world which renders our ordinary life 
possible. While we are willing to admit that it was not the 
intention of the Yogacara school to make the world of 
space and time dependent or contingent on individual 
consciousness, yet we cannot help saying that, in their eager- 
ness to refute naive realism, they confused psychological 
and metaphysical points and countenanced a crude mentalism. 
The confusion is increased by the employment of the same 
term, vijnana, to indicate both the changing and the un- 
changing aspects of mental life. We have the skandha 



632 INDIAN PHILOSOPHY 

vijnana, which is a phenomenal effect of karma, and the 
alayavijnana, which is the ever active, continuous, spiritual 
energy dwelling in all. The reality of the world depends 
on the latter. An absolute consciousness must exist for the 
objects to exist and be known. This does not mean that 
the world is mere consciousness. Yet such an inference 
is often made by the Yogacaras. 

The Yogacaras threw overboard the easy-going assump- 
tion of the realists who looked on mind as a self-contained 
thing confronted in experience by other self-contained 
things. Going behind the two substances of matter and 
mind, they tried to discover a comprehensive reality including 
the two. With true insight they recognised that what is 
really constructive of the object world is intelligence or 
vijnana, which is more than merely individual. Within 
this vijnana arises the distinction between subject and 
object. The alayavijnana is the foundational fact of reality 
revealing itself in individual minds and things. The 
distinction between subject and object is a distinction 
made by knowledge itself within its own field, and not a 
relation between two independent entities, as the Vaib- 
ha§ikas and the Sautrantikas assumed. The alayavijnana 
is the whole containing within itself, the knower and the 
known. Unfortunately, we notice the tendency to identify 
the alayavijnana with skandhavijnana, which is only a 
property of the finite mind. If foundational knowledge 
is confused with the activities of particular subjects in 
space and time, we are upon the slope which leads to the 
precipice of scepticism. Almost all the non-Buddhist critics 
of the Yogacara theory overlook the element of truth 
contained in it (albeit overlaid with a mass of error) and 
repudiate it as mere mentalism. 

fsarhkara criticises the theory that the world has no 
existence except in the human mind on several grounds. 
It fails to account for the variety of perception. How can 
we account for the sudden noise when we are enjoying a 
sunset ? To say that things and ideas are presented 
together does not mean that they are one. Inseparable con- 
nection is different from identity. If all cognitions are empty 
of content, then the consciousness that there are no things 



THE SCHOOLS OF BUDDHISM 633 

is also empty. The comparison of waking to dream is due 
to a confusion. Dream experience is subjective and private, 
while the waking is not so. Objects of waking knowledge 
endure, while dream objects last only during dreams. Samkara 
argues that there is a real difference between dreaming 
and waking. We may dream of travelling great distances, 
and if the two, dreaming and waking, were identical, then we 
should get up at the place to which we have travelled, not 
as we actually do at the same place where we were when 
we began to dream. If it is said that the two are not con- 
tinuous, and it is open to us to infer the falsity of dreams 
from waking, as much as waking from dreams, Sarhkara 
replies, that since waking experience is the one experience 
which affects us practically, we infer that dreams are false. 
If the Buddhist seems to infer the falsity of the waking world, 
he must have access to some experience to contradict the 
waking one. If he admits any such higher experience 
he would allow that there is something permanent after all, 
and so the momentariness theory vanishes and Vedantism 
is established. We cannot perceive non-existent things. 
Sarhkara takes his stand on psychological facts. “ We are 
always conscious of something,” and not merely conscious. 
Nobody when perceiving a post or a wall is conscious of 
his perception only. We are conscious of the object of 
perception, a post or a wall. A dream chair is not part 
of the dreaming mind any more than the chair on which 
we sit in waking life is part of the mind of the sitter. To 
be dependent on mind is not to be a part of mind. The 
statement that the perceptual consciousness takes on the 
form of the thing cognised so that we are never conscious 
of a thing, but only of a form belonging to our consciousness, 
is according to £amkara absurd. If from the start there 
were no objects, he asks, how could perception take on the 
form of objects ? It is because objects exist that conscious- 
ness is able to take on their form. Otherwise consciousness 
would be free to take on any form it pleased. If it is said 
that our consciousness of things as external is illusory, that 
we see objects as if they were external, whereas in reality 
they are not, Saiiikara asks, if really there were nothing 
external, how can we have even an illusion of externality ? 



634 


INDIAN PHILOSOPHY 


If there were no such thing as a snake at all, if we did not 
know of it, we could not imagine it in the rope. Therefore 
external objects must exist . 1 

Kumarila argues that there is a distinction between 
waking and dreaming “ For us, dream cognition is certainly 
falsified by the perception of the waking cognition contra- 
dicting it. While for you, what would constitute the difference 
between the reality of waking cognition and dream conscious- 
ness, both of which you hold to be equally false ? ” 2 To 
the objection that the waking cognitions are invalidated 
by the insight of the yogis, Kumarila says : “ Such yogic 
cognition is not found to belong to any person in this life ; 
and as for those who have reached the yogic state, we know 
not what happens to them. ”3 If the Niralambanavadin 
cites the Nyaya theory in his support to the effect that 
judgment and inference are explained by it on the basis of 
ideas of subject and predicate of the constituent propositions, 
and that these do not necessitate the external reality of objects, 
Kumarila replies that the Nyaya accepts the reality of external 
objects and proceeds on that basis.4 To trace the differences 
of ideas to impressions leads us to anyonyasraya, or mutual 
dependence and infinite regress. We can have no differen- 
tiation of the pure form of the idea. Vasana or impression 
brings about a distinction in the apprehender, but not in 
the object apprehended,5 and vasana itself is inexplicable. 
“ Ideas being momentary and their dispersion total (leaving 
no trace behind), there being no association of the impressed 
and the impresser (since the two do not in any case appear 
together), there can be no vasana.” The two moments not 
being together cannot be related by way of impression. Even 
if they were together, they could not be related, since both are 
momentary and cannot operate on each other. 6 If properties 
of previous cognitions persist in subsequent ones, we cannot 
say that they are destroyed totally. It is the need for a 
permanent consciousness, which is capable of impressions 
and preserving the vasanas, that makes the Yogacaras 


* See also Udayana : Atmatattvaviveka. 

* v. 3. 88-S9. Slokavarttika. 

3 93-94- 4 167 - 175 - 

I 180-1. * 182-5. 



THE SCHOOLS OF BUDDHISM 


635 


look upon alaya as a permanent entity, yet they are obliged 
by their Buddhist presuppositions to look upon it as ever 
changing. Hence the unsatisfactoriness of the Yogacara 
doctrine. Saiiikara’s criticism hits off the point well. Unless 
there exists one continuous principle which cognises every- 
thing, we cannot account for knowledge. If alayavijnana 
is looked upon as the permanent self, the distinctive feature 
of Buddhism that there is nothing permanent .is gone. The 
philosophical impulse led the Yogacaras to the Upanisad 
theory, while the Buddhist presuppositions made them halt- 
ing in their acceptance of it. 

The Yogacaras, however, felt that reducing the world to 
a mere relation of ideas would be to deprive reality of all its 
meaning. The phenomenal existence of the world with its 
distinction of subject and object is accepted by them. 
Madhava writes : “ Nor must it be supposed that on this hypo- 
thesis, the juice, the energy and the digestion derivable from 
an imaginary and an actual sweetmeat will be the same.” 1 
This reminds us of Kant’s famous distinction between the 
imaginary and the real hundred dollars. Psychologically 
the Yogacaras admit the distinction of subject and object. 
But critical analysis reveals to them that these are all differ- 
ences within a whole which the Yogacara identifies with 
vijnana or thought. The empirical self finds an object over 
against itself, without which its own conscious life is not 
possible. That which the empirical self finds given is not for 
the absolute, a mere contingent datum. The w r orld is as 
real as the particular self and independent of it, though 
dependent upon the universal consciousness. We need 
hardly point out how very similar the latter view of the alaya- 
vijnana is to the philosophy of Fichte, which looks upon all 
experience as that of a self-conscious subject. To him the 
self is both act and product in one. The ego affirms or 
posits itself, and it does so by op-positing or distinguishing 
from itself a non-ego. By this process of limitation or negation 
the ego brings into being the element of otherness. The 
absolute ego differentiates into a multiplicity of finite egos 
at once other than itself and modes of itself. 

The world in space and time appears to be real, because 
» S.D.S., p. 26. 

21 


VOL. I 



636 INDIAN PHILOSOPHY 

of our imperfect apprehension. Our intellect, though funda- 
mentally free from the modes of subject and object, still, 
thanks to the succession of unreal ideas or to the beginningless 
predispositions, 1 develops diverse distinctions between the 
percipient and the percept. Our buddhi is twofold, cog- 
nitional and non-cognitional. The former leads to a correct 
apprehension of truth, the latter which is dependent on a 
fundamental insensitiveness is evolved out of the skandhas, 
ayatanas and the dhatus (or the material components of the 
body), and is the source of avidya, and is not an authoritative 
criterion of truth. 3 Every individual has the vijnana in 
which the germs of all things exist in their ideality. The 
objective world does not exist in reality, but by means of the 
subjective illusion created by avidya the individual projects 
the germs in the alayavijiiana to the outside world, and 
imagines that they are as they seem to him to be. We have 
again subjectivism here, since the objective world is reduced 
to mind stuff. “ In the all-conserving consciousness or 
alaya, avidya obtains, and from non-enlightenment starts 
that which sees, that which represents, that which appre- 
hends and the objective world, and that which constantly 
particularises.” 3 The empirical ego comes from a com- 
mingling of the alaya with avidya, and this empirical ego 
has for its correlate the empirical world, and both are pheno- 
menal and are transcended in the alaya. The metaphysical 
is the truth of the psychological. 

All thoughts excepting those of a Buddha have a three- 
fold nature or character : (i) the imagined nature (parikalpita), 
(2) dependent or caused nature (paratantra), and (3) absolute 
or metaphysical nature (parinispanna). Our dream experi- 
ences come in the first class. Thought externalises itself 
in the form of dream figures. Such wrongly objectified 
objects of cognition are the bodily organs, things known 
by them and the material universe. In the idea of the ego, 
ahamdrsti, thought presents itself to itself, »as object 
and subject of cognition. From the opposition of duality 
arise the so-called categories of being, non-being, essence, 

1 Ana divas ana vasat (S.D.S., ii. 26). 

• S.S S.S., iii. 4. 6-7. 

I Asvagho^a: Awakening of Faith, p. 75. 



THE SCHOOLS OF BUDDHISM 637 

etc. The dual nature results from the fact that we consider 
the so-called objects which are only forms of thought to be 
external and existing in themselves, even as a dreamer 
believes in the reality of dream elephants when he notices 
them. This duality has no metaphysical reality, but is a 
product of imagination, parikalpa or vikalpa, which imposes 
on thought the categories of subject and object. But whence 
do thoughts derive their origin ? What is the law according 
to which they appear in an ordered succession ? They are 
not produced by the external objects of the realists. Nor 
are they due to an immutable Atman, as the Vedantins argue, 
nor are they autonomous. Thoughts are dependent one upon 
another. M. Poussin writes : “ All the Buddhist philosophers, 
maintainors of the doctrine of karma, had to admit that 
thoughts, although momentary, do not perish altogether, 
but originate new thoughts, sometimes after a long interval 
of time. As long as they believed in the existence of matter 
and considered man as a physico-psychical complex, it 
was not difficult for them to explain the interdependence 
of thoughts.” The six classes of cognitions had a material 
support and exterior excitements, and it was possible to 
explain all the psychological facts, including memory, with 
these six cognitions. But the idealists had to work out a 
system of psychology without the hypothesis of any material 
element. They say “ that the cognitions acknowledged by 
the realist schools, visual . . . mental cognitions create seeds 
(bija), which will ripen in due time without any interference 
except for the power of the bodhisattvas into new visual . . . 
mental cognitions. Now these seeds are not a part of the 
visual . . . mental cognitions which arise in succession between 
the sowing and the ripening of the seeds; for example, the 
cognition of blue which will emerge to-morrow in a certain 
series of cognitions named ‘ I ’ depends on yesterday’s 
cognitions of belief. But its seed is not to be found in any 
of the cognitions of which I am conscious to-day. There- 
fore we must add to the sixfold cognition of the primitive 
psychology another group of cognitions which the modern 
philosopher would style unconscious or subliminal images ; 
these are the seeds of actual cognition ; they are created 
by actual cognition ; beside and below the actual cognition, 



638 INDIAN PHILOSOPHY 

they flow as a series of momentary subliminal images which 
proceed, owing to an uninterrupted self-reproduction ; this 
series bears the old supply of seeds, is enlarged by the sowing 
of new seeds, and will stop when the series have borne fruit 
and no new seeds sown.” 1 If no new seed is sown and the 
old stock is exhausted, we pass beyond the second stage 
of knowledge and reach the third, called parnispanna. 
The duality of subject and object is realised to be accidental 
to thought, being produced by the misconception of imagina- 
tion. To know thought in its metaphysical aspect, duality 
has to be overcome. True, when once it is freed from duality 
it becomes ununderstandable, beyond expression. No char- 
acter (visesa) can be predicated of it ; it can be said only to 
exist (bhavati eva). It is therefore defined as vastumatra, 
simply thing, or cittamatra, mere thought. 

It is open to us to look upon parikalpitasatya as positive 
error, as when we mistake a rope for a snake ; paratantrasatya 
as relative knowledge, as when we recognise a rope as a rope ; 
and parinispannasatya as metaphysical insight, as when 
we recognise that rope is a mere concept and has no being 
as a thing in itself. Nagarjuna reduces the first two to one, 
samvrti satya, and calls the third paramartha. Parikalpita 
is the illusory knowledge of Kant, which is purely subjective, 
being unconditioned by the categories. It cannot stand 
critical judgment and has no practical efficiency. Paratantra 
is the empirical knowledge of Kant, relative and conditioned. 
Through this categorised knowledge the absolute reality, 
free from all conditions, cannot be known. It is possible 
for us to rise to the metaphysical insight since the one 
universal dwells in all. It exists whole and undivided in 
every single thing, entirely free from all forms of the pheno- 
mena. Plurality is possible because of subjection to time 
and space, which are the principles of individuation. The 
alaya is free from diversity, though its phenomena are innu- 
meiable in space and time. The highest state which trans- 
cends all opposites, in which the positive and the negative 
are one and the same (bhavabhavasamanata), is called 
by the Yogacaras tathata, or pure being. 3 

Agreeing with the realists, the Yogacaras divide all 

1 E.R.E., vol. ix., p 8 j<">. • See Mahayanasutralamkara. 



THE SCHOOLS OF BUDDHISM 639 

things in the universe into the two groups of samskrta, or 
composite, and asamskrta, or non-composite. The composite 
dharmas are also similarly divided as in the realist schools, 
though in them the first place is given to rupa, or matter, 
while the Yogacaras give it to citta, or mind. Citta or 
mind is the ultimate source of all things. This citta has 
two aspects, laksana or phenomenal, bhava or noumenal. 
The former deals with its changeableness, the latter with 
its immutability. It has two functions, attending to objects 
and receiving impressions. Altogether its dharmas are 
eight, the five dependent on the sense-organs, the sixth of 
the internal sense, the seventh of vijnana which speaks of 
them, and the eighth of the alayavijnana. 1 

The asamskrta dharmas are six : Akasa is the limitless, 
free from all change, which is identified with mere being; 
Pratisamkhyanirodha is the cessation of all kinds of klcsas 
or sorrows, attained through the power of perfect knowledge ; 
Apratisamkhyanirodha is cessation acquired without the 
aid of perfect knowledge. Acala is the state of disregard for 

* Satiikara says : " With reference to this doctrine we malce the following 
remarks : * Those two aggregates, constituting two different classes, and 
having two different causes which the Buddhists assume, viz., the aggregate 
of the elements and elementary things whose cause the atoms are, and the 
aggregate of the five skandhas, cannot, on Buddhist principles, be estab- 
lished, i.e. it cannot be explained how the aggregates are brought about. 
For the parts constituting the (material) aggregates are devoid of intelligence, 
and the kindling of intelligence depends on an aggregate of atoms having 
been brought about previously. And the Buddhists do not admit any 
other permanent intelligent being, such as either an enjoying soul or a ruling 
lord, which could effect the aggregation of the atoms. Nor can the atoms 
and skandhas be assumed to enter on activity on their own account, for 
that would imply their never ceasing to be active. Nor can the cause of 
aggregation be looked for in the so-called abode (i.e. the alayavijrana 
pravaha, the train of sclf-cognition), for the latter must be described either 
as different from the single cognitions or as not different from them. In 
the former case it is either permanent, and then it is nothing else but the 
permanent soul of the Vedantins ; or non-permanent, then being admitted 
to be momentary merely, it cannot exercise any influence and cannot there- 
fore be the cause of motion of the atoms. And in the latter case we are 
no further advanced than before. For all these reasons the formation of 
aggregates cannot be accounted for. But without aggregates there would 
be an end of the stream of mundane existence, which presupposes these 
aggregates.* ** ( Commentary on Vedanta- Sutras, edited by G. Thibaut, pp. 

403—4.) Avidya is no explanation of the formation of aggregates, for How 
can it be the cause of that without which as its abode it is not capable oi 
existence ? Besides, the notion of causality is itself unintelligible. 



640 INDIAN PHILOSOPHY 

all power and pleasure, and Samjnavedananirodha is that 
where vedana (feeling) and sariijna (perception) do not 
act. These five are not independent, but are different names 
conventionally employed to denote the noumenal aspect of 
the universe. We may call them the different stages by 
which the highest reality can be attained. Dharmapala 
says : “ All these five conventional terms are given to several 
stages of manifestation and parts of pure being.” This takes 
us to the true metaphysical absolute of the Yogacara school, 
viz., tathata. “ This is the transcendental truth of every- 
thing, and is termed tathata, because its essential nature 
is real and eternal. Its nature is beyond the reach of language. 
It is indefinable .” 1 Lest we mistake it for nothingness, it 
is called bhava, or existence. Asanga says : “ It can neither 
be called existence nor non-existence. It is neither such 
nor otherwise. It is neither born nor destroyed. It neither 
increases nor decreases. It is neither purity nor filth. 
Such is the real laksana or nature of the transcendental 
truth.” 

Pure being or tathata is also called alayavijnana, in 
its dynamic aspect, when it is combined with the principle 
of individuation or negativity. The moment we make 
pure being into vijnana or cit, we introduce the element 
of individualism. The alaya has difference eternally in 
its own heart. We have the self-realising consciousness, 
an absolute of the Hegelian type . 3 The moment we descend 
from the absolute being to the alayavijnana we get in 
addition to consciousness a principle of space, in addition 
to being a non-being. Space is nothing but a mode of 
particularisation, and has no real existence of its own. The 
whole phenomenal world is due to the particularisation of 
the confused mind. If the confusion clears up, the modes 
of relative existence vanish. Space is real and eternal in 

* Vasubandhu. 

* " That there is one spiritual self-conscious being of which all that is 
real is the activity or expression ; that we are related to the spiritual being, 
not merely as parts of the world which is its expression, but as partakers 
in some inchoate measure of the self-consciousness through which it at once 
constitutes and distinguishes itself from the world ; that this participation 
is the source of morality and religion ; this we take to be the vital truth 
which Hegel had to teach.” (T H. Green : Works, vol. iii., p. 146.) 



THE SCHOOLS OF BUDDHISM 


641 


a limited sense. 1 The contingent appearances traceable 
to avidya do not affect the pure spirit. We seem to have 
what later Vedanta calls vivartavada, or phenomenalism. 
“ The appearance of duality in the unity of cognition is 
an illusion.” 1 Again : “ The internal principle manifests 
itself as if it were external.” 3 The one truth is seen in the 
form of a world through the force of avidya. We cannot say 
in what sense all things are in the absolute. If all are in it, 
there is no meaning in development. If they are not, if 
the absolute produces them, then it cannot remain unaffected 
by what it produces. The avidya which is the cause of all ex- 
perience, which obtains the moment we have the alayavijhana, 
cannot be accounted for. “ Though all modes of consciousness 
and mentation are products of avidya, avidya is in its ulti- 
mate nature identical and not identical with enlightenment. In 
one sense it is destructible, in another it is not.” 4 Enlighten- 
ment and non-enlightenment are one, as all kinds of pottery, 
though different are made of the same clay.” 5 Tathata 
is the first principle. Alaya with avidya comes next. Next 
we have the empirical subjects and objects, which grow 
feeding upon each other. 

Every individual has in him the higher principle bound 
up with a selfish individuality. Individuality dings to us 
so long as we are subject to avidya. The differences among 
men are due to the force of ignorance. “ Though all beings 
uniformly have the same quality, yet in intensity, the ignor- 
ance or principle of individuation, that works from all eternity, 
varies in such manifold grades so as to outnumber the sands 
of the Ganges.” 6 Samsara is the going on or pravrtti of 
the particularising tendency due to the defilement of our 
thought. V asanas, or tendencies, and karma, or work, keep 
up uninterruptedly the continuance of the circuit. Alaya, 
or citta, is the source of the objects we perceive, and has 
in it potencies determined by our past conduct which are 
bound to develop. All dharma, pain, pleasure, good and 
bad conduct, are the outer manifestations of the potential 
seeds stored in the alaya. Some of these seeds are full 


■ Suzuki, p. 107. 
* Suzuki, p. 67. 


1 S D.S., p. 27. 

J Ibid., pp. 73-74- 


1 Ibid. 

4 Ibid., p. 80. 



642 


INDIAN PHILOSOPHY 


of defilement, 1 and so make for samsara. Others are free 
from defilement, 2 and so tend to liberation. It is the presence 
of the transcendental element that helps us to think of higher 
ideas. 

But the mere presence of the absolute will not lead to 
liberation. A distinction is made between raison d’etre 
(hetu) and cause (pratyaya). The combustible nature of the 
wood is the raison d’etre of the fire ; but we must set fire to 
it, or it will not burn. Even so, though the presence of the 
absolute may be the raison d'etre of salvation, still the practice 
of wisdom and virtue is necessary. Asanga writes : “By 
not clinging to wealth or pleasures, by not cherishing any 
thoughts to violate the precepts, by not feeling dejected 
in the face of evils, by not awakening any distraction or 
indolence of attention while practising goodness, by main- 
taining serenity of mind in the midst of disturbance and con- 
fusion of the world, and finally by always practising single- 
mindedness (ekacitta) and by the right comprehension of 
the nature of things, the bodhisattvas recognise the truth of 
vijnanamatra, the truth of the origin of all in conscious- 
ness.” The Yogacaras practise yoga. Yoga helps us to 
acquire intuitive insight. Discursive understanding gives us 
dependent or empirical knowledge. The metaphysical truth 
requires yogic discipline. When the mind is clear of all 
prejudice or illusion, it reflects the truth.3 

Nirvana is purification of mind, its restoration to its primi- 
tive simplicity or radiant transparency. " When by con- 
stancy of reflection we rid ourselves of all prejudgments, 
there arises knowledge freed from the illusions which take 
the form of objects, and this is called Mahodaya, the grand 
exaltation or emancipation. ”4 The Vijnanamatra Sastra 
distinguishes four kinds of nirvana, (i) Nirvana is a 
synonym for dharmakaya, the undefiled essence present in 


* Sasravabija. • Anasravabija. 

3 See the la-st book of Spinoza’s Ethics, where he makes out that the infinite 
in man whose essence is light and harmony will be liberated from the world 
of darkness and discord, when the passions are subdued. So long as the 
mind is th„ prey of passions, it mistakes the unreal for the real. When the 
fluctuations of mind which arise from these passions are destroyed, the 
intuition of the true “ existence of tilings ” becomes possible. 

* S.D.S., p. 26. 



THE SCHOOLS OF BUDDHISM 


643 


all things. This nirvana is possessed by every sentient indi- 
vidual, pure and spotless, in its native being. (2) Upadhisesa 
nirvana, or that which has some residue left. It is a state 
of relative being which, though freed from all affection, 
all hindrance, is still under the fetters of materiality which 
cause suffering and misery. (3) Anupadhistsa nirvana, or 
that which has no residue. It is a complete liberation 
from all fetters. (4) The nirvana which means absolute 
enlightenment, and has for its object the benefiting of others, 
is the highest kind of nirvana. 

While the Yogacara theory did a great service to the 
science of logic, by pointing out the necessity of thought for 
all reality, it betrayed its weakness by its frequent denial 
of all non-mental reality and experience. The use of the 
term alayavijnana is too indefinite. It is sometimes con- 
sidered a synonym for tathata, when it is identified with 
vastumatra, the mere abstraction of being, the pure exist- 
entiality, the Hegelian Seyn, the ultimate which remains 
when we abstract from every fact and form of existence. 
Again, it is considered to be a phenomenon of the mind 
including other phenomena in its scope. It is also the 
cosmic mind with the principle of negativity in it. Some- 
times it is equated with the stream of consciousness within 
the individual. The indefiniteness of the theory on such a 
central issue has exposed it to a good deal of legitimate 
criticism. 


V 

The Madhyamikas 1 

The Madhyamika philosophy is an ancient system which 
can be traced to the original teaching of Buddha. Buddha 
called his ethical teaching the Middle (madhyama) Way, and 

1 Of the Madhyamika philosophy, the main text is the Miidhyamika 
Sutras of Nagarjuna, a South Indian Brahmin, who, according to Kunu- 
rajiva who translated his biography into Chinese in a.d. 401, lived about the 
middle of the second century a.d., though the tradition of his system may 
be assigned to the first century of the Chtistian era. There is al.~o a view 
that Nagarjuna lived in the first century before Christ. Sarat Chandra 
Das is of opinion (see Indian Pundits in the Land of Snow, p. 15) that 
Nagarjuna converted Dhorabhadra, who lived in 56 b.c., to Buddhism, if 

VOL. I 21 s 



644 


INDIAN PHILOSOPHY 


repudiated the two extremes of an exaggerated asceticism 
and an easy secular life. In metaphysics he condemned all 
extreme positions, such as that everything exists, or that 
nothing exists. The Madhyamika philosophy tries to adopt 
the mean between extreme affirmation and extreme negation. 
We have in Nagarjuna one of the greatest thinkers of India, 
a far more vigorous sifting of the contents of experience 
than we found in either the subjectivists or the realists 
He is sustained by an unselfish intellectual enthusiasm and 
philosophical ardour, which aim at thoroughness and com- 
pleteness for their own sake. His philosophy is nearer 
now to scepticism, now to mysticism. His scepticism is due 
to his realising the essential relativity of thought. Yet he 
has faith in an absolute standard of reality. His scepticism 
is Buddhistic, while his absolutism derives from the Upani- 
sads. In the true philosophic spirit Nagarjuna reveals the 
paradoxes which our everyday consciousness veils by means 
of a more or less thoughtless phraseology and indifference 
to reflection. The Yogacara suggests the relational view of 
reality from which Nagajuna develops his scepticism. But 
the positive part of his philosophy is not different from the 
Advaitic interpretation of the Upanisad view. It is a serious 
mistake to suppose that we have in Nagarjuna only a revival 


the account of Indian history preserved in the Archives of the Dalailama 
are to be believed. The Chinese traveller Yuan Chwang holds that Nagar- 
juna lived in Southern Kosalt, 400 years after the death of Buddha, and 
obtained supreme enlightenment as a bodhisattva. Dr. Vidyabhusan 
places Nagarjuna about a.d. 300. In no case could he have been later than 
a.d. 401, when Kumarajiva translated the life of Nagarjuna into Chinese. 
Moreover, Nagarjuna assumes a knowledge of the definitions of the sixteen 
categories as given in the Nyaya Sutras, and wrote a treatise on the pra- 
manas. In it Nagarjuna reduced the syllogism of five members into one 
of three. In another work on logic, called Upayakausalyahrdaya 6astra, 
we find a clear exposition of the art of debate. In the VigrahavyavartanI 
Klrika, Nagarjuna criticises the Nyaya theory of pramanas, and perhaps 
\ atsyayana knew Nagarjuna’s views. The Sanskrit Commentary on the 
Madhyamika Sutras which we possess is by Candraklrti, who probably lived 
in the first half of the seventh century a.d. Santideva, of the seventh 
century a.d., is named sometimes among the Madhyamikas and at other 
times among the Yogacaras. In his works, Bodhicaryavatara, Siksasamuccaya, 
ho recognises two kinds of truth, samvrti and paramartha, and accepts the 
doctrine of sunya. “ Make thy merit sure by deeds full of the spirit of 
tenderness and the iunva ” (6iksasamuccaya, v. 21). The other systems of 
thought criticise the Madhyamika theory. 



THE SCHOOLS OF BUDDHISM 


645 


of the Upanisad doctrine. He seems to draw his inspira- 
tion from the Upanisads, though his philosophy is developed 
within the shadow of and with special reference tc the 
Buddhistic views. The result is a type of thought which 
has never existed before, though it is supposed to be derived 
from the Prajnaparamita. It is perhaps better to point 
out that the general view places the Sunyavada earlier than 
the Vijnanavada, though one can never be sure of it. The 
two perhaps developed side by side. Anyway, our order of 
treatment helps us to see the logical relations of the two 
systems. 


VI 

Theory of Knowledge 

If we cannot pass from perceptions to the objects they 
are supposed to refer or represent, how can we pass beyond 
perceptions to a self-consciousness which is said to perceive ? 
We cannot credit thought with a reality which we deny to the 
external world, since both are groups of passing phenomena. 
We do not know what consciousness is apart from seeing, 
feeling, willing, etc. Substance is not different from attributes. 
Were it so, it is beyond apprehension. There is, therefore, 
no need to look upon the external world as a phenomenon 
of the internal, or make the subject all-pervasive. The 
Yogacaras accounted for the empirical world by positing a 
continuous subject. The argument is pushed a step beyond 
this and the very shadow of the soul is given up. If the 
Yogacaras are right, then there are no objects to be known. 
Even Vijnana cannot exist if there are no objects to be 
known . 1 No object means no subject. Thus the Madhya- 
mika abolishes the constant alaya and sets the stream of 
ideas adrift. If there are no objective relations discoverable, 
there is no world at all. External objects as well as internal 
states are both void, sunya. The Madhyamika says that 
we are dreaming even when we are awake. Through 
the pressure of logic, the Madhyamika infers the final in- 
explicability of subject and object. The explanations of 
science and common sense which assume their validity are 
« S.S.S.S., iii. i. 18. 



646 INDIAN PHILOSOPHY 

interesting and valuable, but they are not the final truth. 
Before we attempt to define the exact significance of the 
Madhyamika theory of the phenomenality of the world, 
let us consider the arguments by which the Madhyamika 
establishes his view. 

The Madhyamika, as the name implies, adopts a position 
midway between extreme affirmation and extreme negation. 
If the world were real, no changes can occur in it at all. 
Improvement and enlightenment are possible only if the 
world is plastic and in a state of constant becoming. As 
Candrakirti, commenting on Nagarjuna, observes : “If 
everything has its own self-essence, which makes it impossible 
to pass from one state to another, how could a person desire 
to ascend, if he ever so desire, higher and higher on the scale 
of existence ? ” We cannot do anything in a world perfect 
and real. So it must be unreal. Nagarjuna asks: “If you 
negate the doctrine of Sunya, you negate causation. If 
there were such a thing as self-essence, the multitudinousness 
of things must be regarded as uncreated and imperishable, 
which is tantamount to eternal nothingness. If there were 
no emptiness, there would be no attainment of what has not 
yet been attained, nor would there be the annihilation of 
pain nor the extinction of all the passions.” 1 The nature 
of the world as an evolving process compels us to deny 
absolute reality to it. It seems clear from this that while 
Nagarjuna denies absolute being to the world, he does not 
reduce it to mere nothing. 

The Madhyamika theory of the phenomenal nature of the 
world follows from the doctrine of pratityasamutpada, or de- 
pendent origination. A thing is a mass of dharmas following 
one another in unbroken succession. The individual human 
being is a collection of dharmas, since every thought, sensation, 
or volition is a dharma. A carriage is the name of a collection 
of material dharmas ; a man is a collection of material and 
mental dharmas which constitute his pseudo-individuality. 
Apart from dharmas, carriage and man have only an ideal 
existence, an existence of designation (prajnapti) Dharmas 
alone exist, but they are doomed to destruction. Dharmas 
are moments in a continuous series. Every thought may 

* Chap. xxiv. 



THE SCHOOLS OF BUDDHISM 


647 


have as its determining cause or pratyaya a great 
number of dharmas, more or less external to itself, object 
of vision, visual organ, etc., but its cause or hetu properly so- 
called is the thought immediately preceding it, even as every 
moment of the duration of the flame depends on the oil, 
the wick, etc., though it is truly a continuation of the preced- 
ing moment of the flame. Nothing is by itself. Everything 
depends on something else. The Madhyamikas do tot 
dismiss all dharmas as well as their collections as unreal, 
though they look upon them as phenomenal and momentary . 1 
Yet it must be admitted that in the excitement of the argu- 
ment they sometimes suggest that they are utterly non- 
existent. 

If incapacity to explain is sufficient reason to deny the 
reality of a thing, then neither external objects nor inner 
souls are real. The Yogacaras argue that external objects are 
unreal, since we cannot say whether they arise from existence 
or not, whether they are simple atoms or complex bodies. 
Nagarjuna accepts the principle underlying this theory, 
that the unintelligible is the unreal, but he adds that on this 
showing even consciousness or vijnana is unreal, seeing that 
we cannot say anything consistent about it. It is in this 
connexion that Nagarjuna develops his theory of relations. 
The Yogacaras urge that all things have their being 
through relations of consciousness. We do not know of any 
other medium than a thinking consciousness through which 
alone things can subsist. Nagarjuna admits that relations 
constitute the world. The world is a mere complex of these 
relations. The hosts of heaven, the furniture of earth, all 
the bodies which compose this mighty frame of the world have 
no substantial existence. They are hypost-atised relations. 
But the relations themselves are unintelligible. Nagarjuna 
shows that the whole world of experience is an appearance, 
a mere network of unintelligible relations. Matter and soul, 
space and time, cause and substance, motion and rest, are all 
alike the baseless fabric of the vision which leave not a rack 


1 " When we come rationally to examine things, we cannot ascertain 
the nature of anything ; hence all things must be declared to be inexplicable 
and devoid of any assignable nature or character/* (L^nkavatara Sutra, ii, 

I 73-) 



648 


INDIAN PHILOSOPHY 


behind. Reality must at least be consistent. But the cate- 
gories through which we construct our reality or experience 
are unintelligible and self-contradictory. Intelligibility is the 
minimum expected of reality, but the relations of experience 
do not possess even that. Things which are not consistent 
may be actual, but they are not real. We are reminded of 
the attempt of Bradley, since the general principle is the 
same in the two cases. Of course, we have not here the 
luminous systematic application which constitutes the great- 
ness of Bradley’s metaphysics. Nagarj una’s attempt is 
neither so full nor so methodical as Bradley’s. He lacks 
the latter’s passion for system and symmetry, but he is 
aware of the general principle, and his work has a unity in 
spite of much that is deficient as well as redundant. 

The category of gati or motion cannot be explained. 
We cannot understand its nature. A thing cannot be in 
two places at one time. “We are not passing a path which 
has already been passed. Nor are we passing that which 
is yet to be passed. The existence of a path which has 
neither been passed nor is yet to be passed is beyond 
comprehension.” 1 The path may be divided into two 
sections, that which is already passed and that which has 
yet to be passed. There is no third possible. The first 
is over, the second is not yet, so passing is an impossibility. 
The consequences of this denial of motion are developed 
in the succeeding verses. 2 Since there is no passing, there 
can be no passer. 3 There cannot be an agent without 
passing, and yet how can an agent pass ? “ Inasmuch as 

you are not beginning to pass a path which has already 
been passed, nor are you beginning to pass what has not 
yet been passed, nor what is being passed, what then are 
you beginning to pass ? ” 4 We cannot assert the identity 
of the passer and the passing, since there cannot be a passer 
without the act of passing. If we say that the passer is 
different from the passing, we maintain that there can be an 
act of passing without the passer as well as a passer without 
the act of passing. They are neither identical with nor 
different from each other, and the only conclusion is that the 


1 Madhyamika Sutras, ii. I. 

» ii. 6. 7. S. 


■ ii- 2-5. 
4 ii. 12. 



THE SCHOOLS OF BUDDHISM 


649 


passer, the path and the act of passing are unreal. 1 Nor can 
we say that the act of staying or rest (sthiti) is real. Motion, 
change and rest are all unintelligible. It may appear that 
in all this Nagarjuna is creating artificial difficulties, since 
change and motion are facts. There is no doubt that they 
are actual, but the question is, how can we intelligibly 
conceive them ? So long as we are philosophising, we cannot 
stop short of complete explanation. Motion and rest 
cannot be completely explained, and so they are not final 
truths, but only relative terms, useful conventions. 

In chapter vii Nagarjuna takes up the question of com 
posite substances or saihskrtas which come into existence, 
continue and cease to exist. 2 If the three, origination, 
continuance and extinction, separately do not characterise 
a sarhskrta, how can they be jointly and simultaneously 
in one and the same object? If the object be without 
extinction and continuance at the time of its origination, 
then it is not called a sarhskrta. It is the same with the 
two other qualities. Yet all the three cannot be at the 
same moment. Light and darkness cannot exist simul- 
taneously, so sariiskrtas are not real. In chapter xxi 
he takes up the question of the origination and extinction, 
(sambhava vibhava) and proves their unreality. From the 
critical point of view, neither production nor destruction is 
possible. In chapter xix the conception of time, as including 
past, present and future, is declared to be an unintelligible 
category. The past is a doubtful report, and the future 
an indeterminate forecast. What is experienced in the 
present seems to be all that is. But we can have no present 
apart from the past and the future. Time, then, seems 
to be a form of thought, fabricated out of emptiness. 3 

A thing is known to us through its qualities. When we 
apprehend all the qualities, we are said to know the thing, 
and when we do not know them, we do not know the sub- 
stance. In chapter v Nagarjuna deals with this question, 
with special reference to the elements of earth, water, fire, 
air, akasa or ether, and consciousness or vijnana, and argues 

1 ii. 14. 18. 

« Utplda sthiti-bhanga-samahara-svabhSvam- 

5 Te ak.lsasthitena cetasa kalarh kurvanti. 



650 INDIAN PHILOSOPHY 

that there is no substance prior to attributes, for that would 
mean an attributeless substance . 1 Where then can the 
attributes exist ? They seem to be neither in substance 
without attributes, nor in themselves, and they can be nowhere 
else. Substance, again, cannot exist beyond the attributes, 
and there is nothing which is not a substance or an attribute. 
An attribute flings us back to a substance, and the substance 
leads us to attribute, and we do not know whether the two 
are one or different. Chapter xv treats of svabhava, or 
inherent property, and shows that neither existence nor 
non-existence can be proved to be the essential property 
of substance. Qualities, like colour, hardness, softness, 
smell, taste, etc., are subjective. They exist because there 
are senses. There would be no colour without the eye, no 
sound without the ear. The qualities then depend on con- 
ditions other than and different from themselves. They 
are not independently real, since they depend on our sense- 
organs. They cannot exist in themselves. Since qualities 
exist in relation to sense-organs, they are all dependent on 
the senses, and so Nagarjuna does not distinguish qualities 
into primary and secondary. Since all qualities are appear- 
ances only, the things in which they reside cannot be real. 
If the thing is related to the qualities, then the “ appearance ” 
character of the qualities should affect the thing as well. 
We are never aware of things which possess these qualities. 
Our knowledge is confined to qualities. The thing so-called 
is beyond experience, and therefore belief in it is a dogmatic 
assumption. We cannot say that these qualities and not 
some others belong to the thing. If substance is merely 
the glue which binds or keeps the qualities together without 
allowing them to clash with each other, then it becomes only a 
relation. Substance is then an abstract relation of qualities, 
and cannot exist apart from consciousness, which is the 
vehicle through which it is created. Substance and quality 
are correlative, and neither can be applied to reality as a 
whole. What absolutely exists is neither substance ncr 
quality, which are mutually dependent. Provisionally in 
our experience we may accept substance to be that in which 
qualities inhere, since we cannot imagine qualities, such as 

■ Chap. i. 



THE SCHOOLS OF BUDDHISM 


651 


weight, form, etc., apart from an underlying substratum. 
As a matter of fact, Nagarjuna believes that things seem to 
be real in virtue of the relationships of causality, dependence, 
contiguity and conditionality. 

The contradictions of the causal relations are brought 
out in chapter iv of the Madhyamika Sutras. “ An object 
as separate from its cause is not perceptible, and the cause 
of the object as separate from the object itself cannot be 
perceived. If the cause of the object is separate from the 
object itself, then you assert that the object is causeless. 
But to assert the existence of the cause of an object is not 
reasonable, for an object without cause does not exist.” 
Nagarjuna argues that an effect separate from cause or 
cause separate from effect is non -existing. A thing is born 
neither from itself nor from another, nor from both, nor 
without cause. Production seems to be logically impossible. 1 
Nothing real can be spoken of as coming to existence, nor 
can it be said that the pot this moment non-existent next 
moment becomes existent. That will be to assert a contra- 
diction. When we know that things have no absolute exist- 
ence, we see that they cannot produce others with such 
existence. If we speak of causes, we do so at the expense 
of logic, indulging in makeshifts of subject and object, 
substance and attribute, space and time. Absolutely 
speaking there is no cause or effect, no production or cessa- 
tion. 2 Sometimes cause is taken as the whole samagri or 
totality, which is also shown to be arbitrary and difficult to 
comprehend. 3 From this discussion it follows that the 
conception of change is unintelligible. A changes into B. 
Nagarjuna argues, if A could become B, it must always have 
been B, else it cannot become B. But it could not have been 
B, for then there is no point in saying that it has become B. 
The process of change is unintelligible. Causation cannot 
account for change, since it itself is an impossible conception. 

1 S.S.S.S., chap. iv. 7. 9, puts the argument thus : “ What is non-existent 
cannot be produced by any cause, such as a square circle ; if origination 
is admitted to be desirable in the case of what is existent, then it produces 
only that which has been already produced. One and the same thing cannot 
be both existent and non-existent. Nor can we say that one and the same 
thing is distinct from both existence and non-existence.” 

* Chap. xxi. 


3 Chap. xx. 



652 


INDIAN PHILOSOPHY 


A quality stands to substance in the relation of dependence. 
The two exist in virtue of a certain relationship. The cogni- 
tion and the cognisable stand in such a relation. Absolutely 
both are unreal, but relatively they seem to exist, and so 
long as one thing depends on another, neither is existent in 
itself. 

A phenomenon occupying a certain time or place stands 
to another in another time or place in the relation of con- 
tiguity, but that spatial relations are relative and that there 
is no absolute priority or posteriority are quite obvious. 

The part stands to the whole in the relation of condition- 
ality, as the threads to the cloth. There is no cloth apart 
from the threads, and there are no threads apart from the 
cloth. Neither has absolute existence. No whole without 
parts, no parts without a wTiole. The two seem to exist 
in virtue of the relationship of conditionality. But it is only 
seeming or sarhvrti. No objects of the universe absolutely 
exist. They appear to exist through relations. 

The question of self is taken up in chapter vi. The 
general principle that there is no substance apart from 
qualities leads to the conclusion that there is no self apart from 
states of consciousness. There is no soul prior to acting, 
feeling and thinking. In chapter ix Nagarjuna says : 
“ Some say that the entity (soul), whose act it is to see, hear 
and feel, existed prior to the acts. But how can we know 
that it existed prior to the acts ? ... If soul could exist 
prior to and therefore without the act of seeing, cannot 
seeing take place independent of soul ? The soul and the 
acts of seeing presuppose each other. Again, if it did not 
exist prior to all hearing, seeing, etc., how can it exist prior 
to each? If it is the same that sees, hears and feels, it must 
have existed prior to each. The soul does not exist in the 
elements from which the acts of seeing, hearing and feeling 
proceed.” The soul cannot be known until the acts of seeing, 
etc., take place So it did not exist prior to these acts. 
Nor does it become existent posterior to them. For if 
the acts of seeing, etc., could take place independently of 
the soul, what is the use of bringing in the latter ? The 
soul and the acts of seeing are simultaneous to each other. 
Unless they are independent of each other, they cannot 



THE SCHOOLS OF BUDDHISM 


653 


exist simultaneously 1 Nagarjuna applies to the self the 
arguments which the Yogacaras used to undermine 
external reality. If the properties which we read into the 
outer universe do not involve a permanent reality called 
matter,- why should the existence of ideas involve a self 
which is not an idea ? The uninterrupted series of momentary 
mental states is all we mean by self. We know nothing a.bout 
the nature of consciousness as such. It is a stream, an 
evolving field of presentations unrolling before us. Belief 
in a permanent self is as daring and dogmatic according to 
Nagarjuna as the parallel belief in a material world. That 
objects of consciousness are arranged in psychological 
sequences so as to constitute separate minds is a mere 
speculation. Things are just what they seem to be. We 
cannot even talk of a stream of ideas. If we admit the 
reality of a soul, apart from conscious states, it is only for 
practical purposes. The mutual dependence of self and 
its states, the agent and his acts, is also brought out in 
chapter via. “ The doer is so called in relation to the 
deed, and the deed is so called in relation to the doer. Abso- 
lutely speaking, there is neither doer nor doing.”* 

Knowledge is impossible of explanation. Sensations 
generate ideas, even as ideas generate sensations. The 
plants produce the seed and the seed again the plant. Per- 
ception is not self-existent. “ You are not seeing that which 
has already been seen. Nor are you seeing that which has 
not yet been seen ; the object of seeing which has neither 
already been seen nor has yet to be seen is non-existent.” 3 
“ The sense of seeing does not see it, nor does that which is 
not a sense of seeing do it. What third, then, is it that 
sees ? ”4 The seer, the seeable, and the act of seeing, answer- 
ing to the passer, the passable and the act of passing are 
all unthinkable. Perception and perceived objects exist 


* The Nyttya system refers to this view of Nagarjuna, and says 
in reply : “ If thus you deny perception, etc., then nobody can establish 
the existence of the objects of sense. If there are no objects of sense, no 
objections can be raised with regard to them. So your objections are alto- 
gether groundless. If you deny all evidences, then your objections lose 
value ; if you admit the validity of your objections, then you agree to the 
variety of perceptions, etc." 

* xvi. x. i iii. 3 . « iii. 4. 



654 


INDIAN PHILOSOPHY 


in relation to each other. If there is no vision, there is no 
colour ; and if there were no colours, there would be no visual 
perceptions. " As the son is dependent upon father and 
mother, even so is the visual sensation dependent on eyes 
and colours.” And we can never be sure that what we 
perceive is not altogether our own. The same thing appears 
differently to different persons and to the same person 
at different times. In chapter xiv samsarga, or contact, 
is analysed and rejected. The changes and states come and 
go, and even succession cannot be maintained unless that 
which feels is a unity which persists through succession. 
But this unitary self is itself a difficult conception. 

Again, what about general properties (jati) ? Are 
they to be found independent of the individuals characterised 
by them (jatimat), or are they always found in the individuals 
only ? All our knowledge depends upon difference. What 
is a cow ? Not a horse, not a sheep. It means a cow is 
not a not-cow. Instead of saying a cow is existent, we say 
it is non-existent as a horse or a tree. All our knowledge 
is relative and sustained by differentiation. The horse is 
non-existent, the world is non-existent. We do not know 
what these are. The dilemma is put thus : We cannot 
know the nature of a thing apart from its distinction from 
others. We cannot know its distinction from others apart 
from a knowledge of its own nature . 1 One thing takes us 
to another, and there is no end to this process. We cannot 
get the final explanations of things . 2 All things are relative. 
Nothing is self-existent, since everything is based on an 
endless series of causes and effects. All properties of things 
are relational, and not absolute. We work with schemes of 
relations which also do not coalesce. Things we see now 
are not seen in deep sleep. What is found in dreams is 
not found when we are awake. If anything were really 
existent, it should be found in all the three states. Thought 
cannot know itself and cannot know another. Truth must 


* Yasman na hi svabhfivarum pratyayadisu vidyate, 

Avidyamane svabhave, parabhavo navidyate. 

• Rupadivyatirekena yatha kumbho na vidyate, 

Vayvadivyatirekeija tatha rupam na vidyate. (Chap. I.) 



THE SCHOOLS OF BUDDHISM 655 

be equated with silence. Knowledge is an impossibility. 1 
Such is the conclusion of Nagarjuna's fierce logic. 

There is no God apart from the universe and no universe 
apart from God, and both are equally appearances. If 
Nagarjuna thus ridicules the idea of God, let us remember 
that it is the deist’s God that he repudiates. He is sincere 
in his devotion to the true God, the Dharmakaya of the 
Mahayana Buddhism. 

With a daring logic he shows how the world, composed 
of birth, life and death, is unreal. 2 Sufferings samskaras 4 or 
mental tendencies, bondage, liberations and all actions 6 are 
unreal. They are due to relations, the nature of which we can 
never comprehend. Nagarjuna has the courage to face the 
conclusions of his logic, however unpalatable they may be to the 
religious interests of mankind. He rounds off his system by 
saying that in reality there is no Buddha or tathagata,7 and 
from the absolute standpoint there is not even any distinction 
between truth and error at all. When there is nothing real, 
there is no possibility of misunderstanding anything. 8 The 
four noble truths of suffering 9 and the conceptions of nirvana 10 
are all unreal. In the very first stanza of his Madhyamika 
Sastra he says: " There is no death, no birth, no distinction, 
no persistence, no oneness, no manyness, no coming in, 
no going forth.” There is nothing real. The negative 
truth of this is already given. No positive demonstration 
is necessary. We require a cause for that which is, and not 
for that which is not. The world has only phenomenal 
existence, and things are neither transient nor eternal, neither 
produced nor destroyed, neither the same nor different, 
neither coming forth nor passing away, except in appearance. 
The world is nothing more than an ideal system of qualities 
and relations. We believe in relations which cannot be 
intelligibly explained. It is the higher superstition of science, 
that the categories useful in the world of experience are ulti- 
mately real, that Nagarjuna explodes. 

The world of experience is an illusion bred by relations. 
The categories of cause and effect, part and whole, which 

* Chap, xxvii. 1 Chap. xi. J Chap. xii. 4 Chap. xiii. 

5 Chap. xvi. 6 Chap, xviii. 7 Chap. xxii. * Chap, xxiii. 

» Chap. xxiv. Chap. xxv. 



656 


INDIAN PHILOSOPHY 


are not self-existent, but mutually dependent, make up the 
world. They give us the provisional seeming reality which 
is the object of samvrti, or conventional knowledge. They 
are suited to the determinations of the reciprocal relations 
'T phenomena. When they attempt to express the true 
essence of existence, they contradict themselves. They are 
working ideas without ultimate philosophical significance. 
We may mention here that while Bradley contends that 
thought establishes relations between terms that are not 
themselves reducible to relations, Nagarjuna accepts a posi- 
tion similar to that of Green, that the reality of experience is 
a relational one, except for the absolute, which stands behind. 
To Bradley, in the world of common sense and science, there 
is always something that cannot be reduced to relations. 
To Nagarjuna there is nothing of that nature here. Yet 
Nagarjuna is not a mere destructive sceptic, but a con- 
structive thinker. There is an ultimate truth which science 
cannot reach. He pulls to pieces all experience, so that he 
may reveal the absolute behind it. The phenomenal world 
involves real oppositions, and the noumenal is pure affirma- 
tion. We cannot help thinking of something behind the 
world we see, hear and feel. The colour, the form and the 
sound which we perceive are not homeless attributes of 
nothing. In chapter iv Nagarjuna tells us that sunyata is 
a conclusion forced on him, and not assumed by him at the 
start. To take it for granted would be to commit the fallacy 
of sadhyasama, petitio principii. Phenomenalism is forced 
on him. The question of logic as theory of knowledge is 
how experience is possible. Nagarjuna exhibits the con- 
ditions which render experience possible, shows their un- 
intelligibility, and infers the non-ultimate character of 
experience. The whole show of Nagarjuna’s logic is a 
screen for his heart, which believed in an absolute reality, 
The outer scepticism was in the interests of the inner truth. 
Nature is an appearance, yet there is the eternal foundation, 
the infinite, from which everything springs and into which 
everything retires. Only when talking about it we must 
drop all categories relative to our empirical life. We cannot 
say what it is, whether it is free or conscious. The questions 
themselves imply the transference to the infinite reality of 



THE SCHOOLS OF BUDDHISM 


65 ? 


the conditions of our finite existence. To refuse to define 
the infinite spirit is not to deny it. The reality of the absolute 
involves the phenomenality of the world. “ The skandlias 
are empty, all things have the character of emptiness, they 
have no beginning, no end, they are faultless and not faultless, 
they are not imperfect and not perfect, therefore, 0 Sari- 
putta, here in this emptiness there is no form, no perception, 
no name, no concept, no knowledge.” 1 

Admitting that the world of knowledge is relational, 
the Yogacaras posited the reality of vijnana which relates. 
Nagarjuna takes up the concept of vijnana as self, and shows 
its inadequacy. If the vijnana is a finite self, then it is not 
the ultimate principle. If it is the infinite spirit, it is wrong 
to attribute to it the empirical category of selfhood. The 
absolute is just the absolute, and we cannot say anything 
of it. All thinking is relative, and the absolute when thought 
becomes a kind of relative ; we cannot think of it as self- 
conscious personality without setting up some dummy to 
relate it to. 


VII 

Degrees of Truth and Reality 

Nagarjuna’s theory of phenomenalism seems to require 
us to abandon the whole scheme of values as an illusion. 
When everything becomes unreal, good and evil are also 
unreal, and we need not strive to attain the state of nirvana 
and free ourselves from miseries which do not exist. We 
cannot live taking life to be an illusion. It seems to be 
wellnigh impossible to base moral life on a detected illusion. 
Though the miseries are unreal, when judged by the absolute 
standard, they are real so far as our present existence is 
concerned. To one who has realised the paramartha there 
is no problem at all. For he has reached nirvana, but those 
who are entangled in the world have to w'ork. Morality 
is not jeopardised, since the course of illusion is irresistible 
to all on earth. The illusion is so vital to human life that 
the distinction of good and evil remains unaffected whatever 

1 Larger PrajnapararnitahnTaya Sutra, p. 148. S.B.E., xlix. 



658 


INDIAN PHILOSOPHY 


might happen to it in the higher condition. Nagarjuna 
recognises two kinds of truth, absolute and empirical. 
“ The teaching of Buddha relates to two kinds of truth, 
the relative, conditional truth, and the transcendent absolute 
truth.” 1 By means of this distinction the otherwise insoluble 
contradiction between absolute nihilism and ethical life is 
avoided. While the higher leads to nirvana, only through 
the lower can the higher be reached. Samvrti is the pro- 
duct of man’s reason. It is the cause of the universe and its 
phenomena. It literally means a covering or screen which 
keeps off the truth. There is no need to prove its existence 
since it is its own evidence. A dreaming man cannot deny 
his dreaming by any argument, since every argument used 
by him is as false as the thing which it goes to prove or 
disprove. When we wake up we can prove the falsity of 
the object seen in a dream. Even so the falsity of samvrti 
or practical truth can be proved by the attainment of para- 
martha or absolute truth. No amount of samvrti argumenta- 
tion can discredit samvrti itself. In it everything happens 
as if things were composed of real and substantial dharmas. 
The distinctions of subject and object, truth and error, bond- 
age and liberation are valid at this level. Ultimately samvrti 
is no truth at all, since it is all a dream or a delusion. All 
things in the world, its beautiful illusions like Buddha and 
sacred hopes of nirvana, are shattered to pieces. The com- 
monplace objection, that if all is illusory, even the idea 
of illusion must be illusory, does not shock Nagarjuna. The 
dialectical difficulties lead him to the acceptance of an 
absolute answering to paramartha or eternal truth. To the 
objection, that if everything is void, if nothing arises or passes 
away, there cannot be any distinction between good and 
evil, truth and error, Nagarjuna replies that the supreme 
truth which will quench all craving and bring inward peace 
lies concealed by samvrti or the conventions of our common 
life. Strictly speaking, there is no existence, no cessation of 
being, no birth or deliverance. The real is sunya in the sense 
that there is nothing concrete or individual. It does not 
mean that it is absolute nothingness or a blank featureless 


* Chap. xxiv. 



THE SCHOOLS OF BUDDHISM 


659 


being . 1 It is empty, as distinct from samvrti, which is said to 
be real. Nagarjuna quotes Buddha to the effect : “ There is 
no woman, no man, no life, no sentient being, no self. All 
these dharmas are unreal, non-existent, like dreams, fictions, 
like the reflection of the moon in the water.” 

Reason is condemned as defective only to make room for 
faith. It is a faith sustained by knowledge, and not bred 
by ignorance. It is not a mere empty play of fancy, but is 
based on reason. If the absolute and the relative truths 
were unrelated, we would be involved in absolute scepticism. 
Knowledge cannot be vindicated, even as the knowledge 
of phenomenon or appearance if it were absolutely severed 
from the knowledge of noumenal reality. Nagarjuna points 
out that without resorting to practical truth the trans- 
cendental truth cannot be attained . 2 The truth of intellect 
is not to be brushed aside, even though it is not final. It 
is not the supreme power which some philosophers take it 
to be. The highest truth which is not revealed by intellect 
is to the finite mind only a postulate. We can believe it 
though we cannot see it. No man can say that he has 
known it as he has known objects of experience. Yet he. 
feels that some such hypothesis is necessary to round our 
experience. The facts in our hands demand completion 
in the manner indicated. Yet the plan is not spread out 
before us. The truth is hovering over our hearts and will 
descend into them if we are ready. We must transcend our 
limitations. Absence of perfect insight is quite consistent 
with belief in its necessity. Though the idea cannot be 
brought within the range of logical argument, yet the faith 
is a grounded one. Only such is true faith, the evidence 
of things not seen. 

Adopting a very abstract standpoint, Kumarila criticises 
Nagarjuna to the effect that : “ It must be admitted that 
that which does not exist never exists, and that which exists 
is absolutely real, and therefore there can be no assump- 

1 Cf. But whereso’er the highways tend. 

Be sure there’s nothing at the end. 

R. L. Stevenson. 

* Vyav. haram ana£ritya paramartho na deSyate, chap. xxiv. 



660 INDIAN PHILOSOPHY 

tion of two kinds of truth.” 1 ^amkara believes that the 
Madhyamika theory supports the mere nothingness of 
the world. Udayana, under the same impression, asks : “ Is 
the conception of £unya or void, a fact or not ? If it is not 
a fact perceived by and through one, how can you say that 
the world is sunya ? If it is a fact, is it self-evident or per- 
ceived by and through some one else ? Then, the existence 
of some one else and what he perceived must both be 
admitted.’* 

i\ agarj una recognises different kinds of existence. The 
objects of hallucination do not exist in the same sense in 
which the objects of perception exist, though both of them as 
facts of mind belong to the same order. All things and 
persons are collections of dharmas, and the difference between 
the two is determined by the nature of the dharmas which 
group themselves. In the case of things similar dharmas 
enter. In the case of persons it is not so. While our vital 
organs, etc., renew themselves without any essential modifica- 
tion, the mental dharmas are subject to great changes. 
The objects of hallucination have no extra-mental existence, 
while those of experience live in the context of experience, 
and to that extent are independent of the subject. Nagarjuna 
recognises that the world exists in the sense of having a posi- 
tion in time and space, though it does not involve permanence 
or persistence. The object of experience has a certain fixity 
due to its spatial position and temporal context. We can 
become aware of it under certain conditions, and repeat 
that experience also. It is trans-subjective, being an object 
common to all normal experience under appropriate condi- 
tions. The purely mental state is neithe* extended nor 
determined by spatial relations, and is of a transient nature, 
and directly apprehended by one subject only. Material 
existence has thus a greater certainty than the purely mental. 
Images are transient, changing with the flow of consciousness, 
while objects of sense-perception are relatively certain and 
capable of reinstatement in consciousness in accordance with 
definite conditions. Existence in the world means position in 
time, space and the causal system, though not absolute self- 
existence. This does not mean that they are non-existent 
1 Na satyadvayakalpana. §lokavarttika, 115, 3, 10 



THE SCHOOLS OF BUDDHISM 


661 


The Lalitavistara says : “ There is no object which is existent, 
neither is there any which is non-existent.” The world is 
not absolutely real, nor is it absolute nothingness, for the 
latter is an impossible conception. By £unya, therefore, the 
Madhyamika does not mean absolute non-being, but only 
relative being. It is Samkara’s empirical existence. To 
say that the things are not substantial in the sense of self- 
existent is one thing. To say that they are not only non- 
substantial, but that they do not exist at all, is quite another. 
We seem to get tendencies of both these views in the 
Madhyamika writings, while the former seems to be their true 
position. The pratityasamutpada doctrine, that it is the 
nature of dharmas to be produced by concurrent causes, and 
and what is so produced is not produced in itself, and therefore 
does not exist in itself, shows only that the actually existent 
things are not ultimately real. £unya in this sense means 
production by causes or dependence. The Buddhist realists, 
the Sautrantikas and the Vaibhasikas, on the other hand, 
lay no stress on the view that what is produced by causes 
does not exist in itself, and is without any substantiality, 
and is therefore Stinya or void. “ All is declared ^unya, empty, 
because there is nothing that is not the product of universal 
causation.” 1 The £unyavada of the Madhyamikas is 
negatively the non-existence of substances and positively 
the ever-changing flux of samsara. It is sometimes said 
that the Madhyamikas assert that the dharmas do not 
exist at all either in reality or in appearance. They are to 
be compared only with such impossible things like the 
daughter of a barren woman. We may describe the beauty 
of such a woman, and yet the object described along with 
the description is non-existent. This view does not represent 
the intentions of Nagarjuna, however much some of his state- 
ments may lend themselves to such an interpretation. One 
such statement is the following : " Do we not experience 
the dharmas ? ” Nagarjuna says. “ Yes, even as the monk 
with diseased eyes sees hair in an alms bowl. As a matter 
of fact, he does not see it, for the knowledge of it does not 
exist any more than its object. This is proved by the fact 
that a man with healthy eyes has no thought about the 

* Chap. xxiy. 



662 


INDIAN PHILOSOPHY 


hair.” When the individual gains absolute truth, he knows 
things in their true nature, and will not then affirm their 
existence. They no more appear to him, and so absolute 
knowledge means no knowledge of things. The whole world 
is like a magical show. The saint free from avidya is not 
subject to it : what seemingly exists is an illusion. Since 
to the Madhyamikas all thoughts and things are void, they 
are sometimes called Sarvavainasikas. This view, that the 
world with its suns and stars is nothing more than a baseless 
appearance, is quite in consonance with the popular classifica- 
tion of the four Buddhist schools into the Vaibhasikas, or 
presentationists, who admit the perceptibility of external 
objects; the Sautrantikas, or representationists ; the Yoga- 
caras, or subjectivists ; and the Madhyamikas, or nihilists. 
But we do not think that this view is true to the teaching of 
Nagarjuna, who is not the common conjurer who wishes to 
prove that the chair we sit on is not a chair. Existence 
in the only possible sense of continuous production of 
phenomena he admits, though he denies to it absolute reality. 


VIII 

SuNYAVADA AND ITS IMPLICATIONS 

The term §unya is variously understood. To some it 
means nothingness, to others a permanent principle, trans- 
cendent and indefinable, immanent in all things. The former 
is true of the world of experience ; the latter of the meta- 
physical reality. Even the illusory structure cannot be sus- 
tained in the atmosphere of a void. All negation depends on 
a hidden affirmation. Absolute negation is impossible. Total 
scepticism is a figment, since such scepticism implies the 
validity of the sceptic’s judgment. Nagarjuna admits the 
existence of a higher reality, though with the Upanisads 
he considers it to be not an object of experience. “ The 
eye does not see and the mind does not think ; this is the 
highest truth, wherein men do not enter. The land wherein 
the full vision of all objects is obtained at once has by the 
Buddha been called the paramartha, or absolute truth, which 



THE SCHOOLS OF BUDDHISM 


663 


cannot be preached in words.” 1 " It cannot be called void 

or not void, or both or neither, but in order to indicate it, it 
is called the void.” 3 There is fundamental reality, with- 
out which things would not be what they are. §unyata 
is a positive principle. Kumarapva, commenting on 
Nagarjuna, observes : “ It is on account of sunyata that 
everything becomes possible, without it nothing in the world 
is possible.” It is the basis of all. “ 0 Subhuti, all d’narmas 
have for their refuge sunyata ; they do not alter that refuge. ”3 
" ^Qnyata is the synonym of that which has no cause, that 
which is beyond thought or conception, that which is not 
produced, that which is not born, that which is without 
measure." 4 As applied to the world of experience, sunyata 
means the ever-changing state of the phenomenal world. 
In the dread waste of endlessness man loses all hope, but the 
moment he recognises its unreality he transcends it and 
reaches after the abiding principle. He knows that the 
whole is a passing dream, where he might sit unconcerned 
at the issues, certain of victory. 

About the ultimate reality we cannot say anything. 
To attain truth we must cast aside the conditions which are 
incompatible with truth. The absolute is neither existent 
nor non-existent, nor both existent and non-existent, nor 
different from both non-existence and existence. 5 To the 
Madhyamikas reason and language apply only to the finite 
world. To transfer the finite categories to the infinite 
would be like attempting to measure the heat of the sun 
by the ordinary thermometer. From our point of view the 
absolute is nothing. 6 We call it sunyam, since no category 
used in relation to the conditions of the world is adequate 
to it. To call it being is wrong, because only concrete things 
are. To call it non-being is equally wrong.7 It is best to 

1 Chap. iii. 

1 Sunyam iti na vaktavyam asunyam iti vSi bhavet 

Ubhayaih uobhayam ceti prajfiaptyartham tu kathyate. 

i Prajnaparamita. 

4 Astasahasrika Prajnaparamita, chap, xviii. 

5 Astinasti ubhaya anubhaya iti catuskotivinirmuktaih Sunyatvam. 
Madhava. S.D.S. 

6 Sunyam tattvam. 

^ Tatra astita. va nastitS. va na vidyate nopalablivate. 



664 


INDIAN PHILOSOPHY 


avoid all descriptions of it. Thought is dualistic in its 
functions, and what is, is non-dual or advaita. Buddha is 
reported to have said : “ What description can be given 
and what knowledge devised of an object which cannot be 
represented by the letters of the alphabet ? Even this 
much of description that it does not admit of representation 
by the letters of the alphabet is made by means of attributing 
letters to the transcendent, absolute, signified by the term 
£unyata.” “ The real state of dharma is like nirvana, inde- 
scribable, incomprehensible, without birth or death, beyond 
the reach of thought and language.” 1 It is in this sense of 
transcending all relations that Duns Scotus says : “ God is 
not improperly called nothing.” ” For thought, what is 
not relative, is nothing.” 3 

While the absolute is free from all modes of limitations 
and cannot be thought by our finite consciousness, still, 
on account of avidya inherent in human mind, it manifests 
itself in the phenomenal world. Avidya is the principle of 
relativity. Of course, the world reflects the permanent 
substance, otherwise we cannot attain paramartha through 
samvrti, which Nagarjuna admits. The essence of things 
is sunya in both senses of the term. " The objects that we 
perceive now were sunya in the past and will be sunya in 
the future. All things in their nature have sunya for 
their essence.” It is avidya that makes us attribute 
existence to things which do not exist. The knowledge 
of the truth is called Mahavidya and its opposite is 
avidya. 

The sunya of Nagarjuna will remind the reader of 
Hamilton’s unconditioned or Spencer’s inscrutable pow'er. 
On account of its non-relational character, it is compared 
sometimes to the One of Plotinus, the substance of 


« Chap, xviii. 

> Bradley. According to the Mahopanisad, Brahman is “ 3finya or void, 
tuccha or trivial, abhava or non-existent, avyakta or unmanifest, adrsya or 
invisible, acintya or inconceivable, and nirguna or qualityless.” Yogasvaro- 
dava describes Brahman whose nature is reality, wisdom and joy as sunya. 
Sunyam tu sacctdanandam mhsabdabrahmaSabditam. Cf. also Kabir : ‘‘They 
call Him emptiness who is the Truth of truths, in Whom all truths are stored." 
(Tagore's translation.) 



THE SCHOOLS OF BUDDHISM 


665 


Spinoza, and the neutrum of Schelling. To the mind 
weary with the agitation of the world it has a great appeal . 1 
The highest is immobile in its absoluteness, and seems to 
be the negation of all becoming. The moment the element 
of negation is asserted, its absoluteness is compromised. 
On such a view, if the absolute is all real, then it cannot have 
any principle of negation. Such a boundless being may 
seem a dead, dull nothing. Negation seems to be as necessary 
as affirmation. Without it we have not the element of 
distinction, and consequently life or manifestation is impos- 
sible. If pure being were alive and real, we should be obliged 
to think in it a principle of distinction, of negativity. 
Nagarjuna would look upon such an argument as “ human, 
much too human.” Our incapacity to define the nature 
of the absolute or understand the mystery of the relation 
between the finite and the infinite need not persuade us 
to the belief that it is nothing. The proof of the absolute 
reality and its fullness of being is the nirvanic bliss attained 
by mystics. If the Yogacara be later than the Madhyamika 
theory, we can easily understand the logic of the develop- 
ment. An intellectual account of Nagarjuna’s absolute 
will lead us to the theory of alayavijnana. From our 
finite level, Nagarjuna’s absolute seems to be immobile 
in its absoluteness. To the Yogacara it is universal 
consciousness, which is ever growing. Things and persons 
are not outside it, but in it. They are in its perpetual 
process, included in the consciousness of the absolute. 
To the Maahyamikas the things seem external to pure 
being, bound in by their own finitencss, closed by their 
existence, and we do not know how they are related to the 
infinite being. Alayavijnana is not a state, but a process. 
It is spirituality, vijnana objectifying itself or expressing 
itself in the object world. The highest way in which thought 


1 Cf. Faber’s hymn : 

O Lord, my heart is sick, 

Sick of this everlasting change. 

And life runs tediously quick 
Through its unresting race and vaiied rangp, 
Change finds no likeness of itself in Thee, 
And makes no echo in Thy mute eternity. 



666 


INDIAN PHILOSOPHY 


can envisage the absolute is by looking upon it as conscious- 
ness, cit, vijnana. In it we have both affirmation and 
negation, identity and difference. The Yogacara theory is 
akin to that type of Hegelianism which puts self-conscious- 
ness at the centre of things. The Madhyamika theory is 
an advaitism of the type of Samkara or of Bradley, for the 
concept of self to it is not ultimate. The idea of self is after 
all a relation, and it is not logical to make the absolute 
subject to any relation whatsoever. 


IX 

Conclusion 

Though the world is phenomenal, we take it to be real, 
through the pressure of past habit. To arrive at nirvana 
we have to follow the ancient path, and put an end to all 
misery by giving up false notions of the reality of things. 
Pain and misery as well as happiness and joy are due to our 
avidya. Mind is the source of all trouble and unhappiness. 
Ethical relations have their value in the finite world. 

It has been shown that sarhsara is a mere show. If we 
understand its truth, then it is nirvana. The truth is 
the absolute. Tathagata is absence of particular being, 
and the world is also absence of definite being . 1 All that is 
said of sunya is true of nirvana. It is beyond the realm 
of relative expression. We cannot say whether it is sunya 
or asunya, or both or neither . 2 Conventionally we say Buddha 
exists. Strictly we cannot say even that. Nagarjuna says : 
“ That is called nirvana which is not wanting, is not acquired, 
is not intermittent, is not non-intermittent, is not subject to 
description and is not created.” When nirvana is obtained, 
ignorance terminates, and the bonds of existence are loosened. 
The unconditioned, uncreate, formless, alone remains. It 
is even said that nirvana is not something to be attained. 
Only ignorance has to be got rid of. 

Those who strive after final attainment or mukti must 
iractise hard the six transcendental virtues of charity, 


1 Chap. xxii. 1 6. See also xxv. 12. 
• Chap. xxii. n. 



THE SCHOOLS OF BUDDHISM 


667 


morality, patience, enterprise, meditation and suprema 
wisdom, and attain perfection in them. If we ask, How can 
a bodhisattva who knows the unreality of all try to lift 
others from their sin ?, the answer may be given in the 
words of Vajracchedika : " He who has entered on the 
path of the bodhisattvas should thus frame his thought : 
All beings must be delivered by me in the perfect world of 
nirvana, yet after I have delivered these beings, no being 
has been delivered. And why ? Because, O Subhuti, if a 
bodhisattva had any idea of beings, he could not be called a 
bodhisattva.” 1 "A gift should not be given by a bodhisattva 
as accepting objects as real.” 2 Strictly speaking, even the 
presumption of the reality of a bodhisattva is untrue. 

The Vaibhasikas started with a dualistic metaphysics, 
and looked upon knowledge as a direct awareness of 
objects. The Sautrantikas made ideas the media through 
which reality is apprehended, and thus raised a screen be 
tween mind and things. The Yogacaras quite consistently 
abolished the things behind the images, and reduced all 
experience to a series of ideas in their mind. The Madhya- 
mikas, in a more daring and logical manner, dissolved mind 
also into a mere idea, and left us with loose units of ideas 
and perceptions about which we can say nothing definite. 
English empiricism repeats this logical movement. The 
starting-point of the mechanist logic of Locke and his successors 
was to conceive of subject and object as interacting, finite 
entities, and the content of knowledge as the product of 
this interaction. Through such knowledge, which contains 
neither of the factors of which it is said to be the product, 
we cannot know either the subject or the object. We see 
the logical consequence of such a theory in the scepticism 
of Hume, where self and world are reduced to sequences of 
mental states. The English side of the movement is thus 
summed up by Reid : “ Ideas were first introduced into 

philosophy in the humble character of images or representa- 
tives of things, and in this character they seemed not only 
to be inoffensive, but to serve admirably well fur explaining 
the operations of the human understanding. But since 
men began to reason clearly and distinctly about them. 

1 S.B.E., xlix. p. 132. ’ Ibid., p. 1. 

VGL. I 


22 



6G8 


INDIAN PHILOSOPHY 


they have, by degrees, supplanted their constituents and 
undermined the existence of everything but themselves. . . . 
These ideas are as free and independent as the birds of the 
air. . . . Yet, after all, these self-existent and independent 
ideas look pitifully naked and destitute when left thus 
alone in the universe, set adrift without a rag to cover their 
nakedness.” 1 Knowledge is not possible, experience is 
unintelligible, and philosophy could go no further without 
i radical reconsideration of its fundamental position. 

From the metaphysical point of view, the two-substance 
theory of the Vaibhasikas becomes loaded on the side of 
mind when we come to the Sautrantikas. The Yogacaras 
dropped the outer world and put mind in the centre of things, 
and the Madhyamikas affirmed that neither individual 
selves nor material objects could be held to be ultimately 
real : the real is the absolute. While the Yogacaras 
confidently apply the concept of self-consciousness to the 
absolute, the Madhyamikas consider self as well as not-self to 
be equally unreal. Personality is not ultimate. 

We need not say that the Advaita Vedanta philosophy 
has been very much influenced by the Madhyamika doctrine. 
The Alatasanti of Gaudapada’s Karikas is full of Madhyamika 
tenets. The Advaitic distinction of vyavahara, or experience, 
and paramartha, or reality, correspond to the samvrti and 
the paramartha of the Madhyamikas. The Nirguna Brahman 
of Samkara and Nagarjuna’s sunya have much in common. 
The force of avidya introducing the phenomenal universe 
is admitted by both. The keen logic which breaks up the 
world into a play of abstractions, categories and relations 
appears in both. If we take an Advaita Vedantin like Sri Harsa, 
we find that he does little more than develop the Madhya- 
mika theory, expose the self-contradictions of the categories 
we work with, such as cause and effect,substance and attribute, 
and deny the reality of things on account of the impossibility 
of adequately explaining them. According to the Khandana 
of Sri Harsa, things are anirvacanlya, or indescribable ; 
according to the Madhyamika vrtti they are nihsvabhava, 
or devoid of essence. To be indefinable and to be character- 
less are, after all, the same. With the Buddhist’s attitude to 

* Works, p. 109 . 



THE SCHOOIS OF BUDDHISM 


C69 


th« unseen, Nagarjuna does not dwell much on the positive 
absolute, though he admits its reality. By his negative 
logic, which reduces experience to a phenomenon, he prepares 
the ground for the Advaita philosophy. It is a strange irony 
that the great exponents of the two doctrines look upon 
themselves as supporting antagonistic positions. 

REFERENCES 

Sarvadarsanasaihgraha, chap. ii. 

Sarvasiddhantasarasamgraha. 

Sariikara's Commentary on the Vedanta Sutras. 

Nagarjuna's Madhyamika Sutras. 

Yamakamj Sogen : Systems of Buddhistic Thought. 




APPENDIX 


FURTHER CONSIDERATION OF SOME 
PROBLEMS * 

The Method of Approach — The Comparative Standpoint — The Upani- 
sads — Early Buddhism — The Negative, the Agnostic and the Positive 
Views — Early Buddhism and the Upanisads — The Schools of Buddhism 
- — Nagarjuna’s Theory of Reality — Sunyavada and the Advaita 
Vedanta. 

My book on Indian Philosophy has been kindly received, 
and I take this opportunity to thank my critics for their 
appreciation and sympathy. I propose to deal here with a 
few controversial issues that the first volume has raised, such 
as the method of philosophical interpretation, the value of 
comparative studies, the teaching of the Upanisads, the 
alleged atheism of Buddha, and the metaphysics of Nagarjuna. 

I 

The historian of philosophy must approach his task, not 
as a mere philologist or even as a scholar but as a philosopher 
who uses his scholarship as an instrument to wrest from words 
the thoughts that underlie them. A mere linguist regards 
the views of ancient Indian thinkers as so many fossils lying 
scattered throughout the upheaved and faulty strata of the 
history of philosophy, and from his point of view any inter- 
pretation which makes them alive and significant is dismissed 
as far-fetched and untrue. A philosopher, on the other hand, 
realises the value of the ancient Indian theories which attempt 
to grapple with the perennial problems of life and treats them 
not as fossils but as species which are remarkably persistent. 
The reactions of the human mind to the problems of philosophy 
which are recorded in the Upanisads or the Dialogues of 
Buddha are to be met with in a reincarnated form in some of 
the most flourishing systems of the present day. Though the 
sayings of the ancient Indians may be scattered, ambiguous 

1 This essay appeared in Mind, vol. xxxv., N.S. No. 138. 



672 


INDIAN PHILOSOPHY 


and unco-ordinated, there is no reason to assume that then 
logic was as full of lacunae as are their literary remains. It 
is the tasJc of creative logic, as distinct from mere linguistic 
analysis, to piece together the scattered data, interpret for 
us the life they harbour and thus free the soul from the body. 
Max Muller wrote: “ What I feel is, that it is not enough simply 
to repeat the watchwords of any ancient philosophy, which are 
easily accessible in the Sutras, but that we must at least 
make an attempt to bring those ancient problems near to us, 
to make them our own, and try to follow the ancient thinkers 
along the few footsteps which they left behind.” 1 Collection 
of facts and the accumulation of evidence are an important 
part, but only a part, of the task of the historian who attempts 
to record the manifold adventures of the human spirit. 2 He 
must pay great attention to the logic of ideas, draw inferences, 
suggest explanations and formulate theories which would 
introduce some order into the shapeless mass of unrelated 
facts. If the history of philosophy is to be more than a bare 
catalogue of facts about dead authors and their writings, if it 
is to educate the mind and enthral the imagination, the his- 
torian should be a critic and an interpreter and not a mere 
mechanical “ ragpicker.” 


II 

The cultivated in both east and west desire now a mutual 
understanding, and nothing is so useful for it as comparative 
studies. There are dangers to which the method is open, 
since it is very difficult to be discriminating for the European 
scholar or the Indian interpreter. The works in the “ Re- 


1 Six Systems of Indian Philosophy, p. 293. 

1 Cp. Hegel: " For, in thought and particularly in speculative thought, 
comprehension means something quite different from understanding the 
grammatical sense of the words alone, and also from understanding them 
in the region of ordinary conception only. Hence we may possess a know- 
ledge of the assertions, propositions, or of the opinions of philosophers; we 
may have occupied ourselves largely with the grounds of and deductions 
from these opinions and the mam point in all that we have done may be 
wanting — the comprehension of the propositions.” Hegel compares such 
non-philosophical historians of philosophy, “to animals which have listened 
to all the tones in some music, but to whose senses the unison, the harmony 
of their tones has not penetrated .” — History of Philosophy, E.T., vol. i., p. xxv. 



SOME PROBLEMS 


673 


ligious Quest of India ” series written by European missionaries 
living in India, though they mark an advance on the publica- 
tions of the missionaries of a previous generation, are not un- 
prejudiced accounts of Indian thought, since they are written 
with the explicit aim of presenting Christianity as the final goal 
of Indian thought and quest. Many of the Western students 
of Indian culture are convinced that Indians have been stunted 
in soul from the beginning and that it is quite beyond them 
to find out for themselves anything worth while in philosophy 
or religion, not to speak of science, art and literature. They 
are certain that the Western nations had held for all time 
the monopoly of effective culture and philosophising. They 
attempt to establish the higher antiquity and superiority 
of the European civilisation and trace everything great and 
good in Indian thought to the Christian era. They declare 
that many of the achievements for which the ignorant give 
credit to the Indian are really borrowings from Greece. They 
are inclined to date the hymns of the Rg-Veda and the civilisa- 
tion reflected in them much later than Babylonian and Egyptian 
cultures. 

While the Western scholar is inclined to dismiss as unfair 
all attempts to compare the “ crude and primitive ” specula- 
tions of ancient India with the mature systems of the West, 
there are not wanting critics in India who feel a sort of old 
pride injured when they find Indian thought compared with 
the Western. They think that, in matters of religion and 
philosophy, at any rate, India is far superior to the West, 
and that Western thought is jejune and primitive when com- 
pared with the Indian. 

With these judgments one sympathises or not according to 
one’s taste. But mutual understanding is not possible without 
mutual respect and sympathy bom of it. If we are true to 
history, we shall see that each nation has had its own share 
of the inner light and spiritual discovery. No cultural or 
religious imperialist, who has the settled conviction that he 
alone has all the light and others are groping in darkness, can 
be a safe guide in comparative studies. The reliable interpreter 
should adopt the empirical method of investigation with a 
reasonable exercise of intelligence and imagination. While 
he should discuss Indian views in terms of modern thought 



674 


INDIAN PHILOSOPHY 


and relate them to the problems of the day, he must be cautious 
and careful in the use of his terms, which may be really different 
though apparently equivalent. He must avoid substituting 
modem arguments for ancient lines of thought. In an enter- 
prise of this kind, one is always liable to be accused of reading 
the one into the other, but there is this difficulty in all historical 
work. The only safeguard against this risk is through the 
adoption of the comparative method. We should then be able 
to bring out what is characteristic of each tradition and appre- 
ciate its value. 

Ill 

Many of my critics were puzzled by my discussion of the 
Upanisads, since I did not fly a banner and fix a label to my 
view. My criticism of the theory of “ illusion,” generally 
associated with fsarhkara’s metaphysics and supported by 
Deussen, led some of my critics to imagine that I was opposed 
to fsamkara’s view. My indifference to personal theism made 
it equally clear to some others that I was not friendly to 
Ramanuja’s interpretation. But if one is not a follower of 
Samkara or of Ramanuja or any other classical interpreter, 
it is assumed that one can only be a reveller in strange un- 
philosophical confusion. I submit that my interpretation of 
the Upanisads is not an unreasonable one, though it may seem 
to differ from this or that tradition in this or that point. 

Scholastic explanations overwhelm the teaching of any 
original genius. We tend to see Socrates with the eyes of 
Plato, or Plato with the eyes of Aristotle or Plotinus. The 
Upanisads are generally interpreted in the light of one or the 
other of the great commentators. My endeavour was to 
show how the Upanisads lent themselves to divergent develop- 
ments and whether it was not possible to give a coherent 
account of their teaching which would do justice to the main 
principles of the two chief interpreters, isarhkara and Ramanuja. 
If we can find a single point of view from which the different 
interpretations can be reconciled and understood— it may be 
that no such point of view exists — but if one can be found, it 
is likely that we can understand the teaching of the Upanisads 
better. In philosophical interpretation, the most coherent 
view is the most true. 



SOME PROBLEMS 


675 


The Upanisads speak with a double voice in describing 
the nature of ultimate reality. They sometimes make it the 
absolute which cannot be characterised by the phenomenal 
categories; at other times they identify it with the supreme 
person whom we are to adore and worship. As the result of 
this, we have two views about the nature of the world. In 
some passages, the world is regarded as an accident of Brah- 
man (the absolute) and in others as organic to God. A careful 
reader perceives these two tendencies running through the 
Upanisads, one which regards the absolute as pure being 
and makes the world an accidental appearance (vivarta) of 
it, and the other which looks upon the absolute as a concrete 
person of whom the world is the necessary expression. 1 The 
former view is nearer fsamkara’s and the latter nearer Rama- 
nuja’s. I confess that “it is difficult to decide whether it is 
the Advaita (or non-dualism) of Sarhkara or the modified 
position of Ramanuja that is the final teaching of the parent 
gospel.’’ * 

The only intelligible reconciliation between two such 
apparently discordant notes seems to be through the device 
of a duality of standpoints. When we rise above the in- 
tellectual level and intuit the nature of reality, we see that 
there is nothing but the absolute, and the world is only the 
absolute, and the problem of the relation between the two does 
not arise, since the absolute and the world are not two distinct 
entities which require to be related. When we envisage the 
absolute from the human end, through the logical categories, 
we tend to view it as a whole which binds together the different 
elements in it. The absolute is looked upon as a personal 
God by whose power of self-expression or maya the world is 
sustained. The absolute as pure being (Saihkara) and the 
absolute as a person (Ramanuja) are the intuitional and the 
intellectual representations of the one supreme fact. 3 As 
these two lines of thought cross and re-cross in the Upanisads, 
Sarhkara and Ramanuja were able to support their views from 
them. As we shall see, Samkara adopts this device of a duality 
of standpoints in attempting to harmonise the different texts 
of the Upanisads. 

' See pp. 168, 172-173, 184-186, 202. * Pp. 258-259. 

I See pp. 1C8, 172, 180-1S1, 184-185, 258-259. 

vol. r * 22* 



67 (> 


INDIAN PHILOSOPHY 


IV 

In my account of early Buddhism, I attempted to make 
out that it is “ only a restatement of the thought of the 
Upanisads ” with a new emphasis. 1 In spite of the absence 
of any specific reference to the Upanisads, it is admitted that 
the teaching of Buddha is considerably influenced by the 
thought of the Upanisads. 1 Indifference to Vedic authority 3 
and ceremonial pietyd belief in the law of karma, rebirth 5 
and the possibility of attaining moksa or nirvana 6 and the 
doctrine of the non-permanence of the world and the individual 
self i are common to the Upanisads and Buddha. While 
Buddha adopts the position of the Upanisads in holding that 
absolute reality is not the property of anything on earth, that 
the world of samsara is a becoming without beginning or end, 
he does not definitely affirm the reality of the absolute, the self 
and the state of liberation. He does not tell us about the state 
of the enlightened after death, whether it is existent, non- 
existent, both or neither, about the nature of the self and 
the world, whether they are eternal, non-eternal, both or 
neither, whether they are self-made, made by another, both 
or neither. As a matter of fact these questions were reserved 
issues on which Buddha did not allow any speculation. While 
there is no doubt that Buddha refused to dogmatise on these 
problems, it is still an interesting question, if it can be answered 
at all, what exactly the implications of this refusal are. 

The three questions, whether there is an absolute reality 
exempt from the changes of the world, whether there is a 
permanent self distinct from the changing aggregates, and 

1 P. 361 ; see also pp. 375 ff. 

1 As orthodox a Hindu thinker as Kumarila declares that even the 
Buddhist views of subjectivism, momentariness and non-self theory di rive 
their inspiration from the Upanisads. “ Vijnanamatraksanabhanganaira- 
tmyadivadanam api upanisatprabhavatvam.” Tanlravatthka, i. 3. 2. 

3 Mundaka Up., i. 1. 5. 

4 Ibid., 2, 7-xo; Brh. Up., i. 4. 15. 

I Chan. Up., v. 10. 7; Katha, v. 7; Ssvet, v. 11-12. 

6 Chan. Up., iv. 15. 5-6; Brh., vi. 2. 15, Svet, i. 7. 8. II. 

^ The changing character of the world is di noti d by the word " jagnt. 
Isa _p., 1; Brh. Up., iii. 1. 3; cf. " sarvain mrtyor annam,” Brh., iii. 2. 10; 
aUo i. 3. 28. In Katha, 1. 12, svarga or heaven is described as a place where 
hunger and thirst, sorrow, old age and death are absent. The futility of the 
greatest earthly pleasures is brought out in Katha, i. 26-^28. 



SOME PROBLEMS 


677 


whether nirvana is a state of positive being, are different sides 
of the one fundamental problem of metaphysics. If there is 
an ultimate reality which is not subject to the laws of the 
world of change, then nirvana is the attainment of this sphere 
of reality and the enlightened one is the permanent self. If 
there is not an absolute reality, then there is no permanent 
self and nirvana is nothingness. The former view is nearer 
the religious idealism of the Upanisads and the latter is nearer 
the negative rationalism of scientific metaphysics. 

Whatever Buddha’s personal views may have beer, he 
declined to engage in discussions about metaphysical ques- 
tions on the ground that they were not helpful to the seeker 
of salvation. His avoidance of all metaphysical themes is 
irritating in its vagueness to the modem historian of philosophy, 
who is anxious to give a label to every thinker and system of 
thought. But Buddha eludes his grasp. Was his silence 
an apology for uncertainty? Was he a mentally timid man 
afraid of speaking out, or was he merely sitting on the fence? 
Was his mind vague and hazy, or was he attempting to avoid 
the danger of being deceived? Was he facing both ways, 
indifferent to the positive and the negative implications of his 
teaching? There are only three alternatives open to us. 
Buddha admitted the reality of the absolute, or did not admit 
its reality, or did not know the truth about it. Let us try 
to determine whether his thought was negative, positive or 
agnostic in character. 

At once we are confronted by the difficulty that we do not 
possess any written record of Buddha’s teachings. The Pali 
Canon came into its present shape long after the death of 
Buddha. It contains matter, some very old and some rather 
late. It is therefore difficult to say with certainty now much 
of the Canonical Buddhism is due to Buddha himself and 
how much is later development. In ancient India, many of 
the discourses and utterances of the teachers were preserved 
in memory by their disciples and transmitted to the genera- 
tions that followed. Such has been the case with the great 
Vedic literature. The same is true of Buddha, who founded 
in his lifetime a regular order and gathered round himself a 
body of disciples who became the representatives of his teach- 
ing. Though we cannot be sure that we have the ipsissima 



678 


INDIAN PHILOSOPHY 


verba of Buddha, there is no doubt that we possess, to a con- 
siderable extent, the substance and the profound depth of his 
teaching. If we doubt the authenticity of Buddha’s great 
deliverances on the four noble truths, the eightfold path, and 
the exhortations attributed to him in the Mahaparinibbana 
Suita and Sutta Nipdta, we may as well doubt the authenticity 
of the teachings attributed to Yajnavalkya, Sandifya and 
Uddalaka. 1 Attempts are made to date the agnostic or the 
negative or positive passages as earlier and assign them 
to Buddha and treat others as the contributions of his followers, 
in the interests of this or that interpretation of early Buddhism. 
But to start with the idea that all passages which conflict 
with one’s reading of Buddha’s silence are later, is to argue 
in a circle; for the ground on which they are regarded as later 
is just that they contain indications of a different outlook. 
Taking our stand on the texts which are generally acknowledged 
to be Buddha’s, let us try to find out what metaphysical stand- 
point they suggest. 


V 

The negative interpretation of his silence is the most 
popular one. Hindu thinkers, early Buddhists and many 
modern students of Indian thought adopt this view. z Buddhist 
studies aroused much interest in the West during the second 
half of the nineteenth century, when men’s minds were swayed 
by scientific metaphysicians like Herbert Spencer and Auguste 
Comte. Naturally Buddhist scholars felt that the silence 
of Buddha was a cloak for negative rationalism. Buddha 
shrank from confessing his faith for fear that he might startle 
his followers out of their wits. If we accept this view, not 
only does Buddha’s philosophy become incoherent, but his 


1 According to Rhys Davids, the four greater Nikayas and the greater 
part of such books of the lesser Nikaya as Itivuttaka and Sutta Nipata are 
as old as 400 B.c. and that of the Vinaya, Muhiivagga, Cullavagga i.-x. is as 
old as 300 b.c. From the representations of the Buddhist stories and legends 
ou the reliefs and monuments of Sanchi, etc., it is clear that about the middle 
of the third century b.c. we had a body of Buddhist texts designated Pitakas 
and divided into five Nikayas. 

* Cp. Professor Macdonell: Buddha " left no doubt about the goal to 
which his teaching led, the cessation of all the samskaras, annihilation of all 
the skandhas. eternal death .” — Hindustan Review, 1923, ,0. 93. 



SOME PROBLEMS 


679 


character also is compromised. There are eve* so many 
passages, admittedly Buddha’s, which cannot be accounted 
for on this view. Besides, the success of Buddha’s teaching 
at a time when the great gods Visnu and Siva were rising 
into prominence will be difficult to explain. We have evidence 
to show that the early converts to Buddhism were religiously 
minded. The Mahasudassana and Cakkavattisihanada Suttan- 
tas reveal to us that the minds of the early Buddhists were 
filled with the legend of the Sun-God. A negative creed was 
not likely to impress the Jatilas or fire-worshippers who were 
among the early converts to Buddhism . 1 A philosophy which 
denies the reality of an ultimate spirit, repudiates the reality 
of the self and promises men annihilation as the reward of a 
virtuous life, is not likely to kindle in the human heart any 
enthusiasm for its founder or fervour for his teaching. To 
assume that such a barren rationalism appealed to the Indian 
heart of the sixth century b.c. is to ignore all laws of psychology. 
So careful a scholar as Professor Berriedale Keith declines to 
believe that Buddha was a negativist. He holds that the 
passages of the Pali Canon which interpret the practical agnos- 
ticism of Buddha as a definite negativism are not to be taken 
as a serious account of Buddha’s teaching . 1 

VI 

The second alternative of agnosticism, which does not 
apparently commit us to any definite view, has had the valu- 
able and impressive support of Professor Keith. He says: “ It 
is quite legitimate to hold that the Buddha was a genuine 
agnostic, that he had studied the various systems of ideas 
prevalent in his day, without deriving any greater satisfaction 
from them than any of us to-day do from the study of modern 
systems, and that he had no reasoned or other conviction 
on the matter. From the general poverty of philosophical 
constructive power exhibited by such parts of the system as 
appear essentially Buddha’s, one is inclined to prefer this 
explanation.” “ Agnosticism in these matters is not based 
on any reasoned conviction of the limits of knowledge; it 
rests on the twofold ground that the Buddha has not himself a 

1 Mahdvagga, i. 15 ff. * Buddhist Philosophy, pp. 47 



680 


INDIAN PHILOSOPHY 


clear conclusion on the truth on these issues, but is convinced 
that disputation on them will not lead to the frame of mind 
which is essential for the attainment of nirvana.” 1 

The “ agnostic ” interpretation which makes out that 
Buddha refused to give answers to metaphysical questions 
simply because he had none to give, is hardly fair to Buddha’s 
genius. If Buddha had himself no theory of life, it would 
have been impossible for him to give a larger meaning and a 
greater depth to life. It cannot be that Buddha voyaged 
through life without a chart, for then his system would be 
unintelligible and his passion for humanity inexplicable. If 
Buddha had no clear convictions on the nature of the ulti- 
mate goal of all striving, if he had no light on the mystery 
of nirvana, how could he say that by perfecting one’s nature 
one would attain the bliss inexpressible? The designation of 
“ Buddha,” “ the enlightened,” which he assumed leads us to 
infer that he had some definite views, right or wrong, on the 
ultimate questions. The depth of conviction which comes 
out in many exhortations to his disciples to follow the Norm 
to reach the truth, is hardly intelligible on the hypothesis of 
agnosticism. “ Let a man of intelligence come to me,” says 
he, “honest, candid, straightforward; I will instruct him, 
teach him the Norm, and if he practice according as he is 
taught, then to know for himself, and to realise that supreme 
religion and goal for the sake of which clansmen go forth from 
the household life into the homeless state will take him — only 
seven days.” 1 Buddha must be either an impostor or a 
deluded man to talk in this strain, if he had no clear views on 
the ultimate questions. 

Besides, this interpretation does not reckon with the 
passages where Buddha says that he does not give out all the 
truths known to him. In the Pdsadika Suttanta ,3 he tells us 
that he does not reveal the truths in his possession, which 
are not likely to help one in one’s moral growth. Samyutta 
Nikaya relates an incident, where Buddha, taking a bunch of 
leaves in his hand, explained to the assembled monks that, as 
the leaves in the forest outnumbered the leaves in his hand, so 
the truths which he knew but had not taught, outnumbered 

* Ibid., pp. 63 and 45. 

1 XJdumbankd Slhandda Suttayita. Digha. N., iii. 56. 3 Ibid., iii. 134. 



SOME PROBLEMS 


681 


the truths which he had taught. While Buddha taught less 
than he knew and believed, his disciples seem to have believed 
rather less than what he had taught them. 

liofessor Keith is not inclined to regard the agnosticism of 
Buddha as a reasoned one. Though it is not logically argued 
out, the view that it is difficult to solve ultimate problems 
by empirical understanding is familiar to the thinkers who 
preceded Buddha. If Buddha refused to say whether the 
world had a beginning or not, it may well be that either alter- 
native seemed to him to be unsatisfactory. If Buddha “ had 
studied the various systems of ideas prevalent in his time,” the 
somewhat reasoned agnosticism of the Upanisads would leap 
up to his eyes. 

It is admitted that the agnosticism of Buddha, if it is 
absolute and not merely pragmatic as in the case of the 
Upanisads, is not creditable to his philosophic power, and 
those who adopt this view of Buddha’s silence are inclined 
to rate him as a philosopher of indifferent quality. But this 
is purely a matter of personal opinion. Buddha’s critical 
attitude to the different metaphysical theories — the sixty-two 
described in the Brahmajala Suita and the ten raised only to 
be set aside as not tending to salvation in the Potthapada 
Sutia 1 — as well as to the religious practices of his time, shows 
that Buddha is a thinker and critic of no mean order. To 
imagine that he was not a close thinker would be to deny 
metaphysical capacity to one who disputed many meta- 
physical schemes. It would be a strange insensibility for 
which there is little proof. Besides, no thinking man, not, 
at any rate, one of Buddha’s intellectual and moral stature, 
could live without some sort of belief about transcendent 
values. 

Those scholars who support the hypothesis of agnosticism 
do so since that view alone fits in with their faith that Buddha’s 
teaching is emphatically a species of primitive thought. They 
reject other interpretations on the ground that they are too 
logical to be primitive. We need not say that the view which 
pictures Buddha as a narrowminded rationalist, an indifferent 
psychologist and a bad philosopher, is hardly calculated 
to convince or even trouble those who do not share the 
> Digha N., i. 1S7 ff. 



682 


INDIAN PHILOSOPHY 


assumptions of the critics. Such a vague dreamer is obviously 
one who could never have had any large religious influence 
even in the India of the sixth century B.c. 

VII 

If we believe that Buddha was not a vague dreamer or a 
hypocrite, but a sincere and earnest soul of an anti-dogmatic 
turn of mind, then a chance phrase or a significant touch may 
contain, to the careful observer, the clue to his general position 
which is the permanent background of his life and thought. 
The spirit of this metaphysics will be all-pervading though it 
may be seldom expressed. 

The emphasis laid by Buddha on the impermanence and 
non-substantiality of the world is plainly in harmony with 
the depreciation of all empirical existence which we find in 
the Upanisads . 1 The crucial question is, whether Buddha’s 
condemnation of the world of experience is the result of his 
acceptance of an absolute reality, as in the case of the Upani- 
sads. When one says that one does not believe in reality 
or God, one only means that one does not believe in the popular 
ideas of them. When Buddha scrapped inadequate con- 
ceptions, it can only be in comparison with a more adequate 
one. As a matter of fact, nowhere did Buddha repudiate 
the Upaxiisad conception of Brahman, the absolute. In the 
Kathavattu, where different controversial points are discussed, 
there is no reference to the question of the reality of an immu- 
table being. All this indicates, if anything, Buddha’s accept- 
ance of the Upanisad position. Besides, the famous sermon 
at Benares suggests strongly the reality of an absolute realm. 
The descriptions of the absolute as neither existent nor non- 
existent, nor both nor neither, remind us of similar passages 
in non-Buddhist texts where they are used to deny not the 
absolute but empirical descriptions of it . 3 

Why, then, did Buddha not admit in express terms the 
reality of the absolute? Buddha refused to describe the 


■ " The wise seek not the stable (dhruvam) among things which are unstable 
(adhruvesu) here,” Katha Up., iv. 2. 

1 R.V., x. 129. 1-2; Brh. Up., ii, 5. 19; iii. 8. 8; Isa Up., 4 and 5; Katha 
Up. iii. 15; Mundaka, i. 1. 6; ii. 2. 1; §vet, vi. 11; Maitrl, iv. 17. 



SOME PROBLEMS 


683 


absolute, for that would be to take a step out of the world of 
relativity, the legitimacy of which he was the first to contest 
in others. The absolute is not a matter of empirical observa- 
tion. The world of experience does not reveal the absolute 
anywhere within its limits. The Upanisads admit as much 
and warn us against applying the categories of the pheno- 
menal world to the ultimate reality. The seer of the Upani- 
sads, when called upon to describe the nature of the absolute, 
kept silent, and when the question was repeated, he persisted 
in his silence and ultimately declared that “ the Atman is 
silence ” (Santo’yam atma). 1 “ Where the eye goes not, 
speech goes not, nor the mind; we know not, we understand 
not how one would teach it.” 2 It is “ other than the known 
and above the unknown.” 3 Often the Upanisads give negative 
descriptions of the absolute. 4 But the conception of the 
absolute as something unknown and incomprehensible, without 
beginning or end, without shape, substance or dwelling-place, 
is too exalted for ordinary people. So the Upanisads indulge 
in positive descriptions to satisfy the interests of religion and 
make known that the unutterable absolute is none the less 
positive in character. While the Upanisads did not dare to 
be loyal to the tremendous admission of the incomprehensi- 
bility of the absolute, Buddha, more consistently, refuses to 
apply any category of the empirical world to the absolute 
reality. While he makes out that the absolute is not the world 
of change, that the self is not the empirical determinations of 
bodily form, perceptions, feelings, dispositions, and intellect, 
that nirvana is not empirical being, he does not say what these 
are, 5 since they are incapable of logical verification. Their 
reality is intuited by the freed, and others have to accept it 
on authority. But when once authority is admitted, there is no 
reason why the authority of the Vedas should not be accepted 
in favour of the Vedic gods. There is no reason why Buddha’s 
view should rank higher than ever so many dreams of the 
human heart and shadows of the human mind which people 

1 S.B., iii. 2. 17. 

* Kena Up., i. 3; see also Katha Up., vi. 12-13; Mundaka, iii. 1. 8. 

3 Kena, i. 4. 

4 Brh. Up., ii. 3. 6; iii. 8. 8; iii. 9. 26; iv.2-4; Katha, iii. 15; Mundaka,i.6. 

s Cp. Augustine: “ We can know what God is not, but not what He is,” 

Trinity, vii. 2. 



C8-1 


INDIAN PHILOSOPHY 


are called upon to accept on the authority of others. The 
Upanisads assert and Buddha agrees, that it is not possible 
for us to attain theoretical certainty on the ultimate questions, 
and those who profess to have attained it are charlatans 
anxious to impose on the vulgar. While Buddha destroyed 
the dogmatism of his predecessors he did not wish to substi- 
tute any dogmatism of his own in its place; for such a 
procedure would encourage disputations which hinder spiritual 
growth. Buddha declares that he does not reveal the truths 
he knows, not only because they are not helpful to the seeker 
of liberation but also because men hold different opinions 
regarding them . 1 In his time, fruitless discussions had 
become almost a mental disease. The Hindu thinkers seemed 
to Buddha to be neglecting the deeper needs of life in their 
anxiety to grapple with the bottomless issues of thought. 
So Buddha exhorted his followers to withdraw from the strife 
of systems and direct their attention to religion as the life 
and the way leading to the attainment of truth. Truth will 
work itself out in us, when we free ourselves from prejudices, 
let reality reflect itself in us and modify our very being. Truth 
is to be found in life itself. It is not a matter of learned con- 
troversy but a spiritual necessity. In view of the obvious 
limits to the logical investigation of reality, Buddha did not 
think it his duty to satisfy the metaphysical craving, though 
he had definite views on the metaphysical questions. 

Within the limits allowed bv logic, Buddha describes the 
ultimate principle of the universe as the law or the dharma. 
The precise significance of the concept of dharma will become 
clear if we look into its previous history in Vedic literature. 
We have in the Rg-Veda the conception of rta as moral and 
physical order. It is not the creation of God but is itself 
divine and independent of the gods who are said to be its 
custodians. The moral order of the world controlling the 
problems of life in its different spheres of law, custom and 
morality is called Dharma. In the Brhadaranyaka Upanisad 

1 Uddua, p. ii ; Samyutta N., v. 437; Digha N., i. 179. To impress the 
incomprehensible character of the absolute by the adoption of the attitude 
of silence is a well-known device. When Vimalakirti was asked to describe 
the nature of the absolute, he remained silent, and Bodhisattva Ma jusri 
exclaimed, “Well done! Well done! Non-duality is truly above words." 
Vwh'Lihuti Sutra. Cp. Suzuki: Mahay ana Buddhism, pp. 106-107. 



SOME PROBLEMS 


685 


it is said that, after creating the classes of Ksatriyas, Vaisyas 
and Sudras, the supreme " created a better form, the law of 
righteousness (dharma). There is nothing higher than the 
law of righteousness (dharmat param nasti). . . . Verily, that 
which is the law of righteousness is truth (satyam). . . . 
Verily both these (satyam and dharma) are the same thing.” 1 * 
The Vedic rta stands for both satya and dharma. 3 4 5 In the 
Tuittinya Upanisad, the perfected soul who has felt the unity 
of his soul with that of the world sings, " I am the firstborn 
of rta (or the Real), earlier than the gods and the centre of 
the immortal.” 3 Similarly, in the Katha Upanisad, where a 
passage from the Rg-Veda^ is substantially repeated, rta 
is identified with the supreme spirit. 5 The supreme Brahman 
is both rta and satya. 6 The identity of dharma and rta 
with satya is a doctrine as old as the Rg-Veda and the 
Upanisads. The one absolute reveals itself to the philoso- 
phically minded as Eternal Truth or Reality, and the way to 
it is through wisdom (j liana) and faith (Sraddha). This is the 
view which the Upanisads emphasise. To those religiously 
inclined, the absolute seems to be Eternal Love and the way 
to it is through love (priti) and devotion (bhakti). This view 
is stressed by some of the later Upanisads, the BhagavaJgitd 
and the Puranas. Those who are ethically disposed look 
upon the absolute as Eternal Righteousness and hold that 
we can attain it through service and self-sacrifice. The one 
absolute which is at once Light, Love and Life reveals itself 
in different ways to the seekers of different temperaments. 

Buddha’s whole attitude is a predominantly ethical one, 
and naturally the ethical aspect of the absolute, its character 
as righteousness, appeals to him most. The place assigned 

1 i. 4. 14. See also Brh. Up., iv. 15. i, Isa Up., 15; The face of the 
real is covered over with a golden vessel; O Pusan, do thou uncover that, for 
one whose law i$ the real (satyadharmaya) to see." See also R.V., iv. 5. 5; 
vii. 104. 8; ix. 113. 4; x. 190. 1. 

1 Rta has for its negative an-rta which is a-satya as well as a-tlharma. 

3 Aham asm! prathamaja rta’sya, purvam devcbhyo nabha yi. 

4 iv. 40. 5; see also Vajasanevi Snmhita, x 24; xii. 14; Tail. Sam., iii. 2. 
10. 1; Sat. Brah., vi. 7. 3. 11; Tait. Aran., vi. 1. 5. 6. Rangara.ma.nu3a, 
commenting on Katha, v. 2. identifies rt am with aparicchinnasatyaxupa 
brahmatniakam. 

5 V,, 2; see $amkara on Tait., iii. 10 and Katha, v. 2. 

6 Rtam satyam param brahma. Tait. Aran., vi. 13. 27. 12. 



686 


INDIAN PHILOSOPHY 


by the Upanisads to Brahman is given to dharma by Buddha. 1 
Dharma controls all things. In the Agaiina Sutlanta, the 
evolution of the world and the gradation of beings in it are 
said to be conditioned by the principle of dharma. 5 Brahma- 
cakra or the wheel of Brahman becomes dhammacakka or the 
wheel of the law. The path of the Brahman is called the way 
of the dharma.3 The eightfold path is called indiscriminately 
the Brahmayana or the dharmayana. The Tathagata is said 
to have Brahman or dharma as his body. He is said to 
become one with Brahman or one with dharma. 4 There are 
many passages in the Pali Canon where we are called upon to 
pay homage and reverence to the dharma.5 In Milinda, 
dharma is personified as the god of righteousness. 6 Dharma 
is the highest reality and the things of the world are dharmas, 
as they are the manifestations of the one ultimate principle. 

On the ground that bodily form, perceptions, feelings, dis- 
positions and intellect are non-permanent, Buddha denies to 

* Cp. Rabindranath Tagore: “ This dharma and the Brahman of the 
Upanisads are essentially the same . . . Dharma in Buddhism is an eternal 
reality of Peace, Goodness and Love for which man can offer up the homage 
of his highest loyalty, his life itself. This dharma can inspire man with 
almost superhuman power of renunciation, and through the abnegation of 
self lead him to the supreme object of his existence, a state that cannot be 
compared to anything we know in this world, and yet of which we can at 
least have a dim idea, when we know that it is only to be reached, not through 
the path of annihilation, but through immeasurable love. Thus to dwell in 
the constant consciousness of unbounded love is named by Lord Buddha, 
Brahmavihara or moving in Brahman," Visvabhurati Quarterly, 1924, 
PP- 385-386. 

J Digha N., iii. 80 ff. 

3 Samyutta N„ i. 141 ; v. 5 ; Theragdtha, 689. 

4 Buddha when he attained nirvana is said to have become " dharma- 
dhatusvabhavatmaka." 

5 Samyutta N., ii. 138; Anguttara N„ ii. 20. 

6 Cp. Sat. Brah., xiii, 4. 3. 14. Cp. Poussin: "If the Buddhists admit 
neither judge nor creator, at least they recognise a sovereign and infallible 
justice — a justice of wonderful insight and adaptability, however mechanically 
it acts. ... In my opinion it is a calumny to accuse the Buddhists of 
atheism ; they have at any rate taken full cognisance of one of the aspects 
of the divine” (quoted in Buddha's Way of Virtue, p. 13). Mr. Saunders 
says: “ His (Buddha’s) serene faith in righteousness and in reality of the 
unseen, intangible values may be called religious; and vve may well believe 
that knowing his people and their genius for religion, he believed that he 
might safely leave them to work out a religious interpretation of this law 
of causality.” Mr. Saunders thinks that Buddha's insistence on the law of 
karma and dharma is a " notable contribution to an ethical theism ” ( Epochs 
of Buddhist History, p. 3). 



SOME PROBLEMS 


687 


them the character of self. 1 The changing character of the 
empirical self is illustrated by the metaphors of fire and the 
movement of water. The Sermon at Benares does not deny 
the existence of a self distinct from the changing empirical 
aggregates. Buddha declines to deny the reality of a per- 
manent self in his conversation with Vacchagotta. The 
Lamkavatara, a work written centuries after Buddha, suggests 
that Buddha accepted the “ self ” theory only to beguile his 
hearers. It is unnecessary to assume that Buddha lowered 
his standards for the sake of expediency, when other explana- 
tions are available. When Buddha argues that nirvana can 
be normally attained before the bodily death of the sage, and 
equates it with happiness of the highest order accompanied 
by the consciousness of the destruction of all rebirth, he 
tacitly admits the reality of the self. When he declares that 
the character of the enlightened one is beyond nature, and 
protests against the accusation that he teaches the destruction 
of the real, 2 he admits that the destruction of the five con- 
stituents does not touch the real self. The Dhammapada 
makes the self the lord of self and the witness of its good and 
evil.3 In the Samkhya and the Advaita Vedanta, we have an 
exclusion from the self of all that belongs to the not-self, in the 
spirit of the Upanisads and Buddhism. 

But Buddha could not confirm the reality of the self on 
empirical evidence. So he declines to answer questions about 
the non-phenomenal self, whether it was one with or different 
from the aggregates. r He did not so much deny the per- 
manent self as speculations about it. Referring to six different 
speculations about the nature of the self, Buddha says: “ This, 
0 monks, is a walking in mere opinion, a resorting to mere 
views, a barren waste of views, an empty display of views.” 5 
Pudgalavada or belief in a permanent self was held by one 
branch of Buddha’s early disciples. Kathdvattu attributes 
it to the Sammitiyas and Vajjiputtakas. We have in the 
Samyutta Nikaya the sutra of the burden-bearer. 6 'I he 

1 See Mahavagga, i. 6. 38; Majjhima N., 35; Mahanidana Sutta : DIgha N., 
ii. 66. 

1 Alagadditpama Sutta: Majjhima N., i. 140. 

3 160. 

« Majjhima N., i. 256. 

5 Sllaciira : Dialogues of Buddha, vol. i„ p. 6. 6 ‘ ^ 2 5 . 



688 


INDIAN PHILOSOPHY 


Buddhist commentators, Buddhaghosa, Vasubandhu, Candra- 
klrti and Yasomitra, who are inclined to a negative interpre- 
tation of Buddha’s teaching, explain it away, though it is 
difficult to believe that the changing aggregates are both the 
burden and the bearer thereof. 

It is generally admitted at the present day that it is wrong 
to identify nirvana with an “ eternity of nothingness.” The 
word “ nirvana ” means literally extinction, and what is ex- 
tinguished is “ craving, sorrow, rebirth.” 1 The earliest con- 
ception of nirvana is that it is an inexplicable state which 
can be attained even here and now 2 by the complete destruc- 
tion of thirst (tanha) and the defilements of mind. 3 It is a 
real condition where sarirsara terminates and an ineffable peace 
is attained. 4 Apannka Suita describes nirvana in words sug- 
gestive of the moksa of the Upanisads. “ Not tormenting 
himself, not tormenting others, already in this lifetime, no 
longer hungry, extinguished, come to coolness, feeling himself 
well, he dwells with self that has become Brahman. ”5 The 
beautiful poetry of the Thera- and the Theri-gathas is inspired 
by ideas of the freedom and joy of nirvana. 

We cannot adequately describe the nature of nirvana since 
it is not an object of logical knowledge. Though it is felt by 
those who share it as strongly positive, conceptually it is a 
negative state. Nirvana is the negation of the empirical 
being bound by the law of karma or samsara. " There is, 
O monks, that which is neither earth nor water, neither fire 
nor air, neither infinity of space nor infinity of consciousness, 
nor nothingness nor perception, neither this world nor that 
world, neither sun nor moon.” “ Where there is neither 
death nor birth, there neither is this world nor that, nor in 
between — it is the end of sorrow.” 6 But it is not non-being. 

■ Malidvagga, vi. 31. 7; S.B.E., vol. xiii. 

3 See Brahmajala Suita : D.N., i. 

J Nandi samyojano luko vitakkasa vicarana 
Tanhaya vippahanena nibbanam ity ucyati. 

Sutta Nipata, 1109; see also 1087. 

4 Majjhima N., 139. Cp. P.ofessor Keith: "That nirvana is real . . . 
oubtless accords with the general tone of the Canon itself” ( Buddhist 

philosophy, p. S3). 

5 Anattantapo aparantapo ditthe ve dhamme nicchato nibbuto sltibhuto 
sukhapati-ainvedl biahmabhutena attana viharati, — M N., i. 412. 

4 Uddna, viii. 1 ; see also ii. 10, and Itivuttaka. 



SOME PROBLEMS 


689 


" There is something unborn, unoriginated, unmade, uncom- 
pounded; were there not such a thing, there would be no 
escape from that which is born, originated, made and com- 
pounded.” 1 There is thus authority for the interpretation of 
nirvana as something uncreate and endless 2 3 4 5 or as an un- 
compounded element different from the passing world. 3 
Uddna alludes to the fate of the enlightened who have attained 
nirvana. Even as the path of the fire when extinguished 
cannot be traced, even so the path of those who are completely 
freed cannot be traced. The Upanisads 4 compare the 
supreme self with the fire the fuel of which has been consumed. 
Only the extinction of the fuel does not destroy the fire which 
ceases to be visible. 5 As the Upanisads distinguish ultimate 
release (moksa) from the attainment of heaven (svarga), so 
Buddha distinguishes nirvana from existence in paradise and 
warns his followers that desire for blissful existence in the 
formless world (arupaloka) is one of the fetters which prevent 
the attainment of nirvana. 

Buddha evidently admitted the positive nature of nirvana. 
Sariputra dismisses Yamaka’s view of nirvana as the night of 
nothingness, as a heresy. 6 * In the interesting conversation 
between King Pasenadi of Kosala and the nun Khema, it is 
admitted that nirvana is an ineffable state which does not 
lend itself to empirical description. The deep nature of the 
Tathagata cannot be fathomed, even as the sands of the 
Ganges or the waterdrops in the ocean cannot be reckoned. 7 
Buddha refuses to answer all questions about the nature of 
nirvana, since the questions impede moral progress 8 and 


1 Uddna, viii. 3. 10. Cp. Chan. Up., viii. 13. 1, where the Brahma-worid 
into which the perfected pass is said to be uncreated, akrtam. The state of 
release is described as uncreated, akrtah — Mundaka Up., i. 2. 12. 

* Milinda, p. 271. 

3 See Psychological Ethics, pp. 367 £f. 

4 Svct Up. 

5 Cp. Keith: “There is no doubt that the Indian idea of the extinction 
of fire was not that which occurs to us of utter annihilation, but rather that 
the flame returns to the primitive, pure, invisible state of fire in which it 
existed prior to its manifestation in the form of visible fire “ (Buddhist 
Philosophy, pp. 63-66). 

6 Sariiyutta N., Hi. 109. 

1 Ibid., iv. 374; Majjbima N„ i. 487. 

* Samyutta N.,.i,i. 223; Majjhima, 63. 



690 


INDIAN PHILOSOPHY 


nirvana is inconceivable (ananuvejjo). “ Whereof one cannot 
speak, thereof one must be silent.” 1 

VIII 

The scientifically minded students of Buddhism tend to 
interpret the teaching of Buddha as a negative rationalism. 
Those who are impressed by the futility of modern attempts 
at metaphysical system-building are inclined to construe 
Buddha’s doctrine as one of agnosticism; and if they come 
across inconvenient passages, they declare that they are the 
work of Buddha’s followers. Professor Keith recognises that 
a positive philosophy affirming the reality of the absolute, 
the self and nirvana, can be traced to the Canon, but he is 
reluctant to attribute it to the Buddha himself and so gives 
the credit for it to “ a section at any rate of his early fol- 
lowers.” 2 The different readings of Buddha’s silence on 
metaphysical questions are motived by different acts of 
faith.3 An impartial historian must strive not only for 
accuracy in his statements but also justice in his apprecia- 
tions. While it is his duty to recognise the inconsistencies 
in a system, he must endeavour, if his interpretation is to be 
fruitful, to account for them by discriminating the essential 

1 Cp. Aurobindo Ghosh: “ The ideal of nirvana was only a negative and 
exclusive statement of the highest Vedantic spiritual experience " (Arya, vi., 
p. ioi). According to Friedrich Heiler, “ nirvana is, althoughit might sound 
a paradox, in spite of all conceptional negativity nothing but 'eternal salva- 
tion ’ after which the heart of the religious yearns on the whole earth ” 
(quoted in the New Pali-Eiiglish Dictionary). The later schools of Buddhism, 
which interpret nirvana as conscious union with the universal Buddha or 
the awakening of the Buddha-self in the human heart, are nearer Buddha’s 
teaching than those which view it as the cessation of all existence 
whatsoever. 

3 Baddist Philosophy , pp. 63-64. 

3 Referring to the place of faith in the interpretation of philosophies of 
an earlier age, where we are wholly confined to written records, “ usually 
fragmentary, often second-hand or of doubtful authority,” Professor Burnet 
says : “ A man who tries to spend his life in sympathy with the ancient philo- 
sophers will sometimes find a direct conviction forcing itself upon him, the 
grounds of which can only be represented very imperfectly by a number of 
references in a footnote. Unless the enumeration of passages is complete — 
and it can never be complete — and unless each passage tells exactly in the 
same way, which depends on its being read in the light of innumerable other 
passages not consciously present to memory, the so-called proofs will not 
produce the same effect on any two minds ” ( Creek Philosophy, pp. 1-2). 



SOME PROBLEMS 


691 


from the accidental. It is not fair to insist on negativism or 
agnosticism where another explanation is not merely possible 
but is probably more in accordance with the ideas of the 
teaching of the early Canon. The “ agnostic ” interpreter 
makes Buddha’s silence a cloak for ignorance and the “ nega- 
tive ” interpreter looks upon it as an act of cowardice. On 
the former view, Buddha did not know the truth, but tried 
to save his face by evading all questions and asserting that 
they were unnecessary. On the latter he had definite views, 
but since he had not the courage to oppose established opinions, 
he kept his views to himself. Those who regard Buddha 
as one of the world’s greatest men, of whom what Plato said 
of Socrates in the Phaedo is not untrue, that he was “ the 
best, and also the wisest and most righteous of his time,” may 
be excused if they do not agree with the assumptions of the 
“ negative ” and the “ agnostic ” interpreters. If we do not 
want to compromise the philosophical power or the moral 
greatness of Buddha, we must accept the positive interpreta- 
tion. It alone accounts for Buddha’s metaphysical com- 
missions and omissions and his ethical teaching which is a 
logical deduction from his metaphysics. It relates Buddha 
to his spiritual surroundings and makes his thought con- 
tinuous with that of the Upanisads. The history of a nation’s 
thought is an organic growth and not a mere succession of 
change on change. 

IX 

If Buddha accepts the metaphysical standpoint of the 
Upanisads, how is it that Buddhism is regarded as a heresy 
by the Hindu thinkers? What is the explanation for the 
cleavage between the Hindu and the Buddhist systems of 
religion and culture ? 

The Hindu quarrels not so much with the metaphysical 
conceptions of Buddha as with his practical programme. 
Freedom of thought and rigidity in practice have marked the 
Hindu from the beginning of his history. The Hindu will 
accept as orthodox the Samkhya and the Purva Mhnamsa 
systems of thought, regardless of their indifference to theism, 
but will reject Buddhism in spite of its strong ethical and 
spiritual note, for the simple reason that the former do not 



692 


INDIAN PHILOSOPHY 


interfere with the social life and organisation, while the 
latter insists on bringing its doctrine near to the life of the 
people. 

In deducing the consequences of the Upanisad philosophy 
with incomparable beauty and logic, Buddha showed the in- 
consistencies in the beliefs and practices of those who paid lip 
allegiance to the Upanisads. While the bold speculators of 
the Upanisads adventured on the naked peaks of the absolute, 
the masses of men were allowed to worship their little gods 
and perform the sacrificial ceremonies which they were 
supposed to demand. The elaborate sacrificial religion failed 
to command the confidence of the thoughtful in Buddha’s 
time. As a matter of fact, the Vanaprasthas and the Yatis 
were exempted from them, and the doubt naturally arose 
whether even the householders could not dispense with the 
costly and complicated ritual. Buddha protested against 
those who were standing still in the letter and proclaimed 
that salvation was not external and legal but inward and 
spiritual. 

The Upanisads advocated the principle of ahimsa or non- 
violence but not unreservedly. The Vedic outlook was so 
strongly entrenched that the Upanisads suffered Vedic institu- 
tions even if they were against the main spirit of their teach- 
ing. For example, the Chandogya Upanisad declares that 
the aspirant after release should, among other things, “ never 
give pain to other creatures except at certain holy places,’ 
i.e. during animal sacrifices . 1 But the slaughter of animals 
was in the highest degree offensive to Buddha 2 and he dis- 
allowed absolutely animal sacrifices. 

While the Upanisads tolerated, even if they did not en- 
courage the caste rules, Buddha’s scheme definitely under- 
mined the institution of caste. He declared that individuals 

1 Ahimsan sarvabhutany anyatra tirthebhyah, viii. 15. 

1 See Kutadanta Sutta : DIgha N., i. 127. Though Buddha insisted on a 
rigorous discipline for the monks, he did not interfere with the socio- 
religious practices of his discipies so long as they did not conflict with 
his central principles. He allowed the Brahmin Kutadanta to pcrlorm the 
sacrifices which did not involve the killing of animals. Kumara Kassapa, 
an immediate disciple of Buddha, instructs Prince Payasi that sacrifices 
which do not involve any cruelty are better than those which do. See 
Payasi Suttanta : Dlgha N., li. The highest sacrifice according to Buddha 
is love of humanity and mora 1 life. See Chan. lip., iii. 16 and 17. 



SOME PROBLEMS 


C93 


were higher or lower not according to their birth but accord- 
ing to their character . 1 While the Brahmins reserved the 
study of the sacred scriptures to the members of the three 
" twiceborn ” castes, Buddha abolished all such restrictions. 
Admitting the intellectual pre-eminence of the Brahmins, 
Buddha ranked along with them the Sramanas and opened 
the latter order to the Sudras and the Candalas. Sunlta, 
the sweeper, was as readily taken into the fold as the high 
caste Brahmin. 2 

In spite of the reforms which he wished to introduce, 
Buddha lived and died in the belief that he was restoring the 
principles of the venerable Aryan faith. He did not think 
of himself as the founder of a new religion, though he was 
anxious to purify Brahmanical Hinduism and revivify the 
society round him. But the pioneers of progress are regarded 
in every age, with not unnatural suspicion, as the champions 
of revolt and rebellion. By putting spiritual brotherhood in 
place of hereditary priesthood, personal merit in place of 
distinctions of birth, logical reason in place of Vedic revelation, 
moral life in place of ceremonial piety, and the perfected sage 
above the Vedic gods, Buddha provoked the wrath of the 
Hindu priest who regarded him as an anti-social force. What 
made Buddha and his followers unpardonable heretics in the 
eyes of the Brahmin priests is the social revolution which 
they preached. There is nothing in the doctrine of Buddha 
which cannot be reconciled with Hindu thought; but the 
conflict between a social system based on Brahmanical 
supremacy and one which denied it is radical. In theological 
discussions, which are generally heated, every dissenter is an 
atheist. If one does not share our illusions, he is a heretic; 
if he adopts a different standard of morality, he is immoral. 
The protagonist of the Vedic sacrificial religion regarded 
Buddha as an enemy of the faith. When Buddha approached 
Bharadvaja the Brahmin, as he was performing a sacrifice 
to the fire, the latter cried out, “ Stop there, O shaven-headed 

• AgannaSuttanta: DIghaN.,iii.; SariiyuttaN.,ii. 138; AnguttaraN..ii. 20. 

2 Kassapasihandda Sutta \ Satnannaphala Sutta, 14; Asoka s Inscriptions 
at Girnir and Sahabajgar. See also Vinaya Pitaka, vol. ii., and Madhurd 
Sutta . Cp. “ The ksatriya is the best of this folk who put their trust in lineage. 
But he who is perfect in wisdom and righteousness, he is the best among gods 
and men " {Ambattha Sutta). 



694 


INDIAN PHILOSOPHY 


one, there 0 Samanaka, there thou of low caste.” 1 Hindu 
orthodoxy adopted a similar attitude whenever there were 
protests against the Vedic religion. Mandana Misra rebuked 
fsamkara for subordinating Vedic piety to knowledge of the 
absolute.* Buddha’s revolt is not against the metaphysics 
of the Upanisads but against Brahmanical Hinduism. The 
schism became wider as the followers of Buddha acquired the 
zeal characteristic of the professors of a new learning, and 
developed their doctrine in a way opposed to the growing 
tradition of the Vedanta. The negative view of Buddha’s 
teaching is embodied in the Kathavattu and the Questions o) 
King Milinda as well as in the classics of the Hinayana and 
the Mahayana forms. No wonder the scholiasts of the Vedanta 
subject the different types of Buddhism to a severe criticism. 


X 

The four Buddhist schools profess to be loyal to the 
teaching of Buddha who discovered the elements of existence 
(dhamma), their causal connection, and the method to suppress 
their efficiency for ever. As against the Ajivakas who denied 
the influence of the past on the present, since the past was 
dead and irrecoverably gone, Buddha affirmed that " every- 
thing exists ” though things were looked upon as combinations 
of forces (sarhskarasamuha). Buddha maintained the existence 
of all things in the interests of moral life. The Sarvastivadins 
(the Vaibhasikas and the Sautrantikas) uphold a pluralistic 
realism. The namarupa of the Upanisads was elaborated by 
the Buddhists into the elements of matter (rupa) and the 
four mental factors (nama) of perceptions, feelings, disposi- 
tions and intellect. Sense-data are matter and the other 
four constitute the soul. Often the elements of existence 
are classified into the six receptive faculties (sadayatana), the 

■ Tatr’eva mundaka, tatr’eva samanaka, tatr’eva vasalaka, titthahi. 

* “ At that time, while Mandana Misra, having invited all the gods by the 
invocation of Salagrama, was washing his hand of the darbha grass, he saw 
the feet of Saihkaracarya inside the sanctified circle. On inspection of his 
person he knew him to be a sannyasin and was in a moment ruffled with 
clamorous wrath and cried out, ' Whence comes this shaven-headed man ? ’ 
(Kuto mundi). Anandagiri: Samkaravijaya. 



SOME PROBLEMS 


695 


five senses and man as and their sixfold objects . 1 The 
objects of manas are non-sensuous and are of sixty-four 
kinds. Sometimes in addition to the five senses, manas and 
the sixfold objects, six modes of consciousness are mentioned 
and we get the eighteen dhatus. Strictly speaking, there 
cannot be any distinction between internal and external or any 
real interaction between the separate elements, though popular 
usage indulges in these unauthorised conceptions. Both 
matter and mind are transformed into continuously flowing, 
discrete moments, of impenetrable stuff in the case of matter 
and of consciousness in the case of mind. These sense-data 
and elements of mind are regarded as obeying causal laws. 
But causation, with reference to momentary entities which 
simply appear and disappear but do not move or change, 
acquires a new meaning. It is only pratityasamutpada 
or dependent origination. One state springs into being 
after another. There is no question of one state producing 
another. 

According to the theory of pluralistic realism, knowledge 
is nothing more than the compresence of consciousness with 
the object. As Professor Stcherbatsky puts it: "A moment 
of colour (rupa), a moment of the sense of vision matter 
(caksuh) and a moment of pure consciousness (citta) arising 
simultaneously, in close contiguity constitute what is called 
a sensation (sparsa) of colour.” 1 It means that the element 
of consciousness appears qualified by an object and supported 
by a sense organ. Consciousness does not apprehend the 
sense organ but only the object, since there is a special relation 
of co-ordination (sarupya) between the two. Consciousness 
is said to apprehend even as a light is said to move. The 
Abhidharmakosa says: “ The light of a lamp is a common 
metaphorical designation for an uninterrupted production of 
a series of flashing flames. When this production changes 
its place, we say the light has moved. Similarly, conscious- 
ness is a conventional name for a chain of conscious moments. 
When it changes its place (i.e. appears in co-ordination with 


• The elements are classified into skandhas. ayatanas and dhatus. See 
Theragatha, 1255. 

* Trayanam sannipatah sparSah (The Central Conception of Buddhism 

P-55). ' 



696 


INDIAN PHILOSOPHY 


another objective element) we say that it apprehends that 
object.” 1 We have only a series of evanescent flashings of 
consciousness itself, but there is nothing that cognises. In 
the continuity of conscious moments, the previous moment 
is the cause of the succeeding one. 

From this view it is but a step to the Vijnanavada of the 
Yogacaras, which reduces all the elements into aspects of 
one receptacle consciousness (alayavijnana). Elements of 
existence (dharmas) are products of thought. Objects rise 
into consciousness as the result of our past experiences. The 
external world is the creation of our thought to which we 
give names and ideas. 2 3 The theory of the overflowing stream 
of thought in which the preceding moment is the cause of the 
succeeding one, where the two are bound together by the 
relation of mere samanantaratva, gives place to the doctrine 
of a substantial universal consciousness (alaya) of which the 
mental states are the modifications (parinama). The concep- 
tion of the degrees of unreality is a tacit recognition of an 
absolute reality. Individual ideas are unreal (nihsvabhava) : 
firstly, because they are logical constructions (parikalpita) with 
no corresponding reality in the extra-mental world; secondly, 
because they are only contingently real (paratantra) ; and 
thirdly, because they are all merged in the one reality (pari- 
nispanna) of the absolute (tathata). The individual elements 
are not real in themselves, but have their reality in the absolute, 
which is of the nature of pure consciousness undifferentiated 
into subject and object (grahya grahaka rahita).3 Since the 
absolute is immanent in the world, all that is necessary for 
the attainment of nirvana is a change of outlook. The mystic 
power of the Yoga helps us to see the things of the world sub 
specie aeternitatis. Samsara to the unregenerate is nirvana 
to the regenerate. But the Yogacara does not carefully 
discriminate between the individual and the universal con- 
sciousness. When he makes out that the distinctions of 
knower, known and knowledge are not real, but are due to a 
beginningless defilement of consciousness, when he compares 


1 IX : See Stcherbatsky, The Central Conception of Buddhism, p. 57. 

* Namasamjfiavyavahara. Lamkiivatdva Sutra, p. S5. 

3 Advayalaksanam vijfiaptimatram. See Stcherbatsky: The Conception 
of Buddhist Nirvana, pp. 32-33. 1 



SOME PROBLEMS 


697 


the relation of particular conscious states to the universal 
consciousness to one of waves to the sea, when he admits 
the eternal reality of tathata and regards it as the only 
uncompounded reality (asarhskrtadharma) and relegates all 
else to the region of relativity, when he reduces all dharmas 
to modes of one fundamental essence; he tacitly admits the 
reality of an absolute consciousness, though the subjectivistic 
tendency makes itself heard quite frequently. The Mad- 
hyamikas subject the Yogacara theory to a searching 
scrutiny. They contend that we cannot have any self- 
consciousness (svasamvitti), for a thing cannot act on itself. 
The finger cannot touch itself, nor can the knife cut itself. 
The Madhyamikas view all the elements of existence as con- 
tingent on one another and so declare the world to be empty 
of reality or sunya. Sunya is also said to be the funda- 
mental truth of all existence. Almost all students of Nagar- 
juna’s MacLhyamika metaphysics regard his system as nihilistic. 1 
In my account of it, 2 I made out that it was more positive 
than it was generally represented to be. I urged that Nagar- 
juna believed in an ultimate reality, which was sunya only 
in the sense that it was devoid of all empirical determinations. 
Let us try to determine whether Nagarjuna’s ultimate reality 
is or is not a stupendous void, an unmitigated negation. 


XI 

There is no doubt about Nagarjuna’s conception of the 
world as unreal or sunya. We mean by real any entity which 
has a nature of its own (svabhava), which is not produced 
by causes (akrtaka), which is not dependent on anything else 
(paratra nirapeksa).3 Whatever is relative or dependent is 
unreal, sunya (svabhava-sunya). The real is the independent 
uncaused being.4 The world of experience is bound by 
the relations of subject and object, substance and attribute, 
actor and action, existence and non-existence, origination, 
duration and destruction, unity and plurality, whole and 

1 Kern: Manual , p. 126; Jacobi: A.O.J., xxxi., p. 1; Keith: Buddhist 
Philosophy, pp. 237, 239, 247, 261. 

1 Pp. 643 ff. 3 M.K., xv. 2. 

4 Asunyam . . . apratltyasamutpannam . M. Vrtti, 403. 



698 


INDIAN PHILOSOPHY 


part, bondage and release, relations of time, relations of space; 
and Nagarjuna examines every one of these relations and 
exposes their contradictions. 1 If non-contradiction is the 
test of reality, then the world of experience is not real. The 
world is neither pure being nor pure non-being. Pure being is 
not an existence or an item of the world process; pure non- 
being is not a valid concept, for, were it so, absolute nothingness 
will be an entity, and what is by definition the negation of all 
existence will become an existent. Nothing is not a thing. 
Existence is a becoming. Things of the world are not but 
always become. They ever supersede themselves. They are 
neither self-existent nor non-existent, since they are perceived 
and induce action and produce effects. Lalitavistara says: 
“ There is no object which is existent nor is there any which is 
non-existent. One who knows the chain of conditional exist- 
ence passes beyond both.” 2 Nagarjuna opens his work with 
the statement that things are neither transient nor eternal, 
neither produced nor destroyed, neither same nor different, 
neither coming forth nor passing away. 3 There is no real 
production (samutpada), but only conditioned (pratitya) 
relative, apparent production. There is no real destruction 
but only apparent destruction (pratitya-samuccheda) ; so 
with the rest. All things of the universe are conditioned and 
relative only. “ Sunya ” is the term used by Nagarjuna to 
designate the conditioned character of the world.4 If a thing 
were real and unconditioned, then it must be free from origin 
and destruction. 5 There are no objects in the world which 
are not subject to change and so the world is sunya. 

Nagarjuna, as the upholder of the middle path, does not 
dismiss the world as mere illusion. His attack is directed 
against the theory of the self-existence of things, but does 


■ Pp. 645 fi. 

» Na ca punar iha kaScid asti dharmah 

So’pi na vidyati yasya nasti bhavah 
Hetukriyaparariipara ya jane 
Tasya na bholiha astinastibbavah. — (Chap, xxv.l 

1 Anirodham anutpadam anucchedam asasvatam 

Anekartliam ananartbam anagamam anirgamam. 

* Yah pratityasamutpadah sunyatam tarn pravaksyate. — M.K., xxiv. 

Sunyah sarvadharmah nihsvabhavayogrna. PrajSaparamiid. 

5 Yady asunyam idam sarvam udayo nasti na vyayalj. — M.K., xxiv. 



SOME PROBLEMS 


699 


not in any way impair the conditioned existence of things. 
Candraklrti, commenting on Nagarjuna, says: “ Our argu- 
ment that objects are not self-existent affects the reality of the 
universe for you who accept the doctrine of the self-existence 
of objects. The view that objects are not self-existent 
does not touch our theory of the conditioned existence of 
objects.” 1 

But it cannot be that Nagarjuna treated the world as 
unreal and yet believed in no other reality. If all thought is 
falsification, there must be a real that is falsified. For, if 
there be no truth, then falsehood loses its meaning. There 
is no relative knowledge without absolute knowledge being 
immanent in it. There is nothing empirical which does not 
reveal the transcendental. “ O Subhuti, all things have for 
their refuge sunyata, they do not alter that refuge.” 2 3 4 If 
things appear to be independent, such appearance is due to 
maya.3 “ 0 Sariputra, things which do not exist, when they 
are affirmed as existing, are called avidya.” * If we mistake 
the phenomenal world for the noumenal reality, it is a case 
of avidya. But we cannot understand the transcendental 
reality except through the world of experience ; and we cannot 
attain nirvana except through the understanding of the ulti- 
mate reality. 5 

The aim of the Madhyamika Sastra is to teach the nature 
of nirvana, which consists in the annulment of the whole 


1 Bhavatas tu svabhavavadinah, svabhavasya bhavanam vaidhuryat 
sarvabhavapavadah sambhavyate; vayam tu pratltyotpannatvat sarva- 
bhavanam svabhavam evam nopalabhamahe, tat kasyaparadam karisyamah, 
M. Vrtti, viii. There are passages which suggest the theory of absolute 
illusion. In xviii., Nagarjuna compares the things of the world to dream- 
castles in the air and the like : 

Klesah karmani dehaSca phalani ca 
Gandharvanagarakara marlcisvapnasannibhah. 

Candraklrti argues that they are characterless like these and not illusory: 

' gandharvanagarakaradivan nihsvabhava veditavyah.” Candraklrti insists 
that " we are relativists, we are not negativists,” M. Vrtti, 368 . 

* Sunyatagatika hi, subhute, sarvadharmah, te tam gatim na vyati- 
vaitante. 

3 Dharmataisa sarvadharmanam mayadharmatam upadaya. . . . 

4 Yatha, sariputra, na samvidyante tatha samvidyante evam avidyamanas 
tenocyante avidycti. 

J Vyavaharam anasritya paramartho na desyate 

Paramarthan; anagamya nirvanam nadliigainyata iti.— — M.K., xxiv. 

vll. i 23 



700 


INDIAN PHILOSOPHY 


world, and is of the nature of bliss. 1 Nirvana which is the 
non-perception of things is the absolute truth. 2 3 * 5 It is identified 
with sunyata in the celebrated work Sataka. 3 Both nirvana 
and Sunyata are characterised in the same negative way. 
Nirvana is neither existent nor non-existent, but is beyond 
both.4 Sunyata is truth or “ tathata which neither increases 
nor decreases.” 5 In the Astasahasrikdprajiidpdramitd, sun- 
yata is said to be profound. “ The word ‘ profound,’ 0 
Subhuti, is the synonym of that which has no cause, that 
which is beyond contemplation, that which is beyond con- 
ception, that which is not produced, that which is not born 
of non-existence, of resignation, of restraint, of extinction or 
of final journey.” 6 7 For Nagarjuna, nirvana, Buddha, sunyata 
are different names for the same reality. If nirvana is inter- 
preted as the cessation of the world, then it becomes a relative 
notion, something brought about by causes. To assume that 
the world exists before nirvana and becomes non-existent 
after it, is an illogical conception. So Nagarjuna insists that 
there is no real difference between the absolute and the pheno- 
menal, nirvana and samsara. He says: “ Having regard to 
causes or conditions, we call this world a phenomenal one. 
This same world, when causes and conditions are disregarded, 
is called the absolute.” 7 When Nagarjuna describes the ulti- 
mate reality as not created, not liable to destruction, not 
eternal, not passing away, he means that the real is opposed to 
all empirical characters. Fie describes his Sunyata almost in 
the very words in which the nirguna Brahman is charac- 
terised in the Upanisads. 8 It is neither one nor multiple, 


1 Sarvaprapancopasama£ivalaksanam nirvanam gastrasya prayojanam, 
M. Vrtti; see also Mandukya Up., 7 and 12. Cp. CandrakJrti : Bhavathava- 
nturdvayarahitatvat sarvasvabhavanutpattilaksana sunyata. — M. Vrtti, xxiv. 

a Yo’nupalaihbhah sarvadharmanam sa prajeaparamitety ucyate. 

3 Sunyatam eva nirvanam kevalam tad ihobhayam. — M. Vrtti, xviii. 

♦ Na cabhavopi nirvanam kuta evasya bhavata 
BhavabhavaparamarSaksayo nirvapam ucyate, — Bainavali. 

5 M. M. Haraprasad £astri says : “ There is in the midst of all these nega- 
tive descriptions an inconceivable positive which is Sunya” (Journal 0/ the 
Buddhist Text Society, vol. ii., pt. iii, p. vi). 

6 xviii. 

7 M.K., xxv. 9. 

• Kena, 3. 11; Brh., ii. 5. 19; iii. 8-8; Katha, iii. 15; Isa, 9~io; 
Muftdaka, i. 6; Mand., 7. 

* f 



SOME PROBLEMS 


701 


neither existent nor non-existent. 1 $unya, the ultimate 
reality, cannot be comprehended by thought or described by 
words 1 . 

Santideva says that absolute reality does not fall within 
the domain of intellect (buddhi) confined to the realm of 
relativity. The Madhyamika denies that discursive thought 
can establish ultimate truth The learned call sunyata the 
annulment of all conceptions; even those who look upon it a's 
sunyata are said to be incapable of improvement.” 3 “ What 

description or knowledge can be given of an object that cannot 
be described by letters? Even this much — that it does 
not admit of representation by letters — is made by means of 
illusory attribution.” 4 In “ illusory attribution ” we use a 
notion which is the closest approximation to the object studied 
but at once withdraw it since it is inadequate to its content. 5 
To know sunya is to know all; if we do not know it, we know 
nothing. 6 The unique undefinable (anirvacaniya) being is 
said to be the real of all reals (dharmanam dharmata), the 
essential thisness (idamta), suchness (tathata), the suchness of 
all existence (bhutatathata), the very matrix of the lord 
Buddha (tathagatagarbha). It will be very difficult to account 
for Nagajuna’s metaphysics and his insistence on devotion 
(bhakti) if we do not admit the absolutist implications of his 
doctrine of sunya. 7 


1 Nastiko durgatim yati, sugatim yati anastikah 

Yathabhutaparijnanarn moksam advaya nisrita ■ — Ary ar ah: iivali. 
One who holds it to be non-existent attains to misery while one who clots not 
think so attains to happiness; but release is for those who have the true 
knowledge of reality- which is neither existent nor non-existent. 

1 Bodhicaryavatara, ix. 2. 

3 Suny-ata sarvadretinam prokta nihsaranam jinaih 

Yesam tu sunyatadrslis tan asadhyan vabliasire. — M.K., xiii. 

4 Anaksarasya dharmasya srutih ka deSana ca ka 

Sruyate yasya taccapi samaropad anaksara. — M. Vrtti, xv. 

5 See Veduntasata, p. 8 (Jacob’s ed.). 

6 M. K., xxiv.; cf. Brh. Up., ii. 4. 5. 7-9; Hi. 2. 1; iv. 4. 2r; v. 1. r; 
Mund ka, i. 3. 

7 Kudolf Otto says: “ What is true of the strange nothingmss of our 

mystics holds good equally- of the sunyam and the Sunyata. the void and 
emptiness of the Buddhist mystics. The void of the Eastern like the 'nothing ’ 
of the Western mystic is a numinous ideogram of the ‘ wholly other.’ Nothing 
can be said of it since it is ‘ absolutely and intrinsically other than and 
opposite of everything that is and can be thought’ ” (The Idea of the Holy, 
E.T., p. 30). > 



702 


INDIAN PHILOSOPHY 


XII 

Much of the confusion is due to the ambiguous word 
" sunya.” It is applied to the world of experience as well 
as to the ultimate reality. The world of experience, built by 
the relations framed by intellect, is unintelligible. Con- 
sistently Nagarjuna denies that he has any thesis of his own 
to defend, since every intellectual proof would be subject to 
the same weakness. If intellect is incapable of explaining 
experience, since it finds hopeless antinomies there, it cannot 
be expected to be more successful with regard to the ultimate 
reality'. One is as mysterious as the other, and Nagarjuna 
employs the same term “ suny'a ” with reference to both. 
Truth is silence which is neither affirmation nor negation. 
In different senses, both the world of experience and ultimate 
reality defy description as existent or non-existent. If we 
take ultimate reality as true being, the world is not; if we 
take the being of the world as true being, ultimate reality 
is not. Both are sunya though in different senses. 

Towards the end of my discussion of Nagarjuna’s system, 
I suggested certain points of similarity between the Sunyavada 
and the Advaita Vedanta. 1 * 3 * Both of them regard the world 
as subject to change and therefore unreal. 1 * The real, which 
transcends all distinctions of experience and knowledge, is 
admitted by both; 3 only Nagarjuna suggests it, but does not 
work it out in all its fullness, as the Advaita Vedanta does. 
The doctrines of maya and avidy 7 a are taken up and developed 
considerably in the Advaita Vedanta. Virtue and vice are 
regarded in both as means to higher and lower stages in 
samsara, while ultimate release remains entire and unaffected 
by these. 4 In giving a rational, as distinct from scriptural, 


1 Pp. 668-669. 

> Samkara would endorse this passage: 

Jaramaranadharmesu sarvabhavesu sarvada 
Tisthanti katame bha\alj jaramaranam vina. — M K.. vii. 

3 Candraklrti’s statement, sarvakalpanajalarahitajnanajueyanivrittisva- 

bhavam, sivam, paramarthasvabhavam, is true to Samkara’s conception of 

release and reality. See also S.B., iii. 2. 17; B.G., xiii. 12. 

“t Dharme ca satyadharme ca phalam tasya na vidyate, M.K. viii. Cp. 

Brh. Up., iv. 3. 21-22; Katha, ii. 14. « 



SOME PROBLEMS 


708 


foundation for the Advaita Vedanta, Gaudapada finds nothing 
so useful as the Madhyamika theory. Many of his Karikas 
remind us of N agar j una’s work . 1 Not without reason does 
Vacaspati look upon the upholders of Sunyavada as those of 
advanced thought (prakrstamati), while the pluralistic realists 
(Sarvastivadins) are said to be of inferior thought (hlnamati! 
and the Yogacaras of middling (madhyama) ability . 1 

• Cp. Gaudapada’s Kariha, li. 32; iv. 22; iv. 88. 

* Bhamatt, ii. 2. 18. 




NOTES 


CHAPTER I 

Page 27. — God, according to Prasastapada, is the creator of the 
universe. See Paddrthadharmasaiiigraha, p. 48. 

Page 33, n. 1. — Bhamatl, i. 1. 1. 

Page 44.- — For the use of the word “ darsana ” in the sense of 
“ point of view ” or “ philosophic opinion,” see Candraklrti on Nagar- 
j una's Kdrikd (p. 75 of the St. Petersburg edition), and the quotations 
from Bhartrprapanca in the Tikd on Suresvara’s Brhadvarttika, p. S90. 
See also Jacobi, Introduction to vol. 22 of S.B.E., p. xlv. I owe the 
reference to Professor Hiriyanna. 

Page 48. — This view is called Sakhacandranyaya. 

Page 52 . — " It is not too much to say that in no literature is the 
moralising note so prominent. It is perhaps just owing to the univer- 
sality of this mode of expression that there are so few works in Sanskrit 
dealing with morality exclusively ” (Macdonell: Comparative Religion, 
p. 70). 

Page 58. — " Sutra period ” is used here with special reference to the 
philosophical Sutras and not the Vedic or Kalpa Sutras. The period 
of the latter is said to be 500 b.c. to 200 b.c. 

CHAPTER II 

Page 64. — The hymns included in the Rg Veda, it is generally 
held, were composed in the north-west of India. See Macdonell: 
Sanskrit Literature, p. 40. 

Page 66. — Arnold takes as the main criteria of the fivefold division, 
metre, language and vocabulary. 

Page 67. — Regarding the age of the Veda, Professor Winternitz 
sums up the results of his investigations thus : — 

1. Buddhism and Jainism presuppose the whole of the Veda. If, 

as it is probable, the origin of the Jama religion goes back 
to Parsva, the predecessor of Mahavlra, the Veda must 
have been completed and considered as the sacred texts of 
Brahmanism as early as the eighth century b.c. 

2. The hymns of the Rgveda are older than all the rest of Indian 

literature. 

3. The origin and growth of the Rgveda-Samhita requires a long 

time, several centuries. 

4. The Rgveda-Samhita is considerably older than the Atharvaveda- 

Samhita and the Yajurveda-Saiiihita. 

All tlie Sarirhitas are older than the Brahmaqas. 

' 70S 



706 


INDIAN PHILOSOPHY 


6 . Both the Bralimanas and the Upanisads need a long time foi 

their development. 

7. The close relationship between the language of the Vedic 

Samhitas on the one hand and Avesta and Old Persian on 
the other, does not allow us to date the beginning of the 
Vedic period back into a hoary age of many thousands to 
say nothing of millions of years b.c. 

8. On the other hand, the facts of political, religious and literary 

history require a period of at least a thousand years and 
probably more between the earliest hymns of the Rgveda and 
the latest parts of the old Upanisads and the rise of Buddhism, 

9. It is not possible to give any definite date for the beginning of 

Vedic poetry. We do not know more for certain than that 
Vedic literature began at some unknown time in the past and 
extended up to the eighth century. 

10. But it is more probable that this unknown time of the begin- 
ning of the Vedic literature was nearer 2500 or 2000 B.C. 
than to 1500 or 1200 b.c. 

[Calcutta Review, November 1923.) 

The recent finds at Harappa in the Punjab and Mohenjo Daro in 
Sind throw additional light on the antiquity of the Indian civilisation, 
We have now definite archaeological evidence to show that 5000 years 
ago, the peoples of Sind and the Punjab were living in well-built cities 
and had a relatively developed civilisation with a high standard of art 
and craftsmanship and a developed system of writing. The Punjab 
and Sind antiquities include “ houses and temples massively built of 
burnt brick and provided with well-constructed water conduits covered 
by marble slabs." Besides a variety of potteries, both painted and 
plain, some fashioned by the hand and some turned on the wheel, 
toys and bangles of blue glass, paste and shell, we have a number of 
engraved and inscribed seals bearing inscriptions in a hitherto unknown 
pictographic script. Sir John Marshall, the Director-General of 
Archaeology', writes that these discoveries “ have established once for 
all the existence on Indian soil in the third millennium B.c. of a civili- 
sation as highly developed and seemingly as widespread as the Sumerian 
culture of Mesopotamia, with conclusive evidence of a close contact 
between the two.” Though it is too soon to say anything definite 
about the connection of India and Mesopotamia in the third millennium 
B.c., these finds may perhaps furnish some clue to the Dravidian 
problem. 

Page 'll. — -The word “ deva ” is connected with the Latin dens 
and is referred to a root meaning “ to shine." The Nirukta definition 
is late. 

Pages 73-4. — Yaska states in his Nirukta that many' of the Vedic 
mantras admit of adhibhautika (physical), adhidaivika (religious) and 
adhyatmika (spiritual) interpretations. Agni, for example, signifies 
fire on the physical plane, the priest god on the religious, and the great 



NOTES 


707 


effulgence of God on the spiritual plane. When the natural forces 
were addressed, the devotee had in mind the underlying power and 
not the physical fact. 

Page 75, n. i. — The language spoken in the early Vedic period was a 
prior stage of what in a later age and probably in a different locality 
became Sanskrit (classical). 

Page 78. — Rta is a conception that goes back to the Indo-Iranian 
period. 

Page 85. — Indra was already known in the Indo-Iranian period. 
See Keith: The Religion and Philosophy of the Veda, vol. i, p. 133. 

Page 89. — In the hymn to Vak (x. 125), we find the conception of 
an immanent word, a force which dwells and operates in all things 
and in which unconsciously all men have their being. 

Page 99. — In the R.V., where the interest is mainly cosmological, 
“ sat ’’ means the world of objects or experience and “ asat ” refers 
to the non-being or the primitive undifferentiated condition of things, 
which is the antecedent of the present world-order; cp. also Tait. Up., 
ii. 7, where “ sat ” or the world of name and form is said to be born 
of “ asat ” or non-being. 

Page 102. — In the Orphic cosmogony, the idea is found that in the 
beginning was the primeval water, from it arose an egg, and out of 
this proceeded the first creature, the god Phanes. See Nilsson: A 
History of Greek Religion, p. 73. 

Page 107. — The ideas of ista (or what is given in sacrifice) and purta 
(or what is given as presents to the priests) (R.V., x. 14. 8) contain 
the germs of later ceremonialism. Istapurta is said to have a distinct 
substantial being with which we get united after death. It stands 
for the merit or demerit which we earn by our pious activities. The 
doctrine of karma is much influenced by this idea. 

Page 109. — Cp. Bloomfield: “ We have in connection with the rta 
a pretty complete system of ethics, a kind of ‘ counsel of perfection ’ ” 
[The Religion of the Veda, p. 126). 

The sense of sin is not absent from the R.V.; cp. “ Loosen the 
bonds, O Varuna, that hold me, loosen the bonds, above, between 
and under.” 

“ So in thy holy law may we, made sinless, belong to Aditi, O 
thou Aditya ” (R.V., i. 24. 15; see also i. 31. 16; iv. 54. 3). 

Page no. — Cp. "Thornless is the path for him who seeks the 
law ” (R.V., i. 41). " To him who keeps the law, whether old or 

young, thou givest happiness and energy that he may live well ” 
(R.V., i. 91). See also R.V., iii. 59. 2. 


CHAPTER III 

Page 128, n. 1. — Strictly the root “ vid ” means " to know.” 

Page 131. — The older Vedic idea of rta relating to the order of the 
physical and the moral spheres becomes definitely transformed in the 



708 


INDIAN PHILOSOPHY 


Brahmanas into the concept of dharma which refers specially to the 
moral order of the world. It includes all those spheres which were 
later discriminated into ritual, code, law, custom and etiquette. Some- 
times “ dharma ” appears as a god. See Sat. Brah., xiii. 4. 3. 14. 

Page 136. — See Keith: Aitareya Brahmana. 


CHAPTER IV 

Page 145. — Though we have spasmodic suggestions of the interest 
in the subject in earlier literature (see Atharva Veda, xviii. 44), it 
becomes dominant in the Upanisads. 

Page 165.- — Manas is bound to prana. Cp. Prana-bandhanam hi 
saumya manah. 

Page 168. — Samkara takes “ anandamaya ” to be the jiva. 

Page 169. — The immanent conception of God also is found in the 
R.V. (see the hymn addressed to Aditi, i. 89. 10), but it becomes 
emphasised in the Upanisads. 

Page 188 n. — Kama and rupa mean “ name ” and “ corporeal 
form” in the Upanisads. See Brh. Up., i. 6. 1-2; Mundaka Up., 
vi. 8; also Oldenberg’s Buddha, pp. 445 ff. 

Page 222 . — Deussen thinks that in the earlier Upanisads only the 
three stages of the student, the householder and the anchonte are 
recognised, while tho.^e who know the truth are exalted above the 
aSramas. See Philosophy of the Upanisads, p. 368. Jdbala Up. 
mentions the four asramas. See Brh. Up., iv. 4. 10 and 22; Chan. Up., 
ii. 23. 1 ; v. 10. 

Page 223, — “ There is current a rather ill-considered modern theory 
to the effect that the philosophers were not of the priestly caste but 
of the warrior caste, perhaps of non-indigenous origin; that even 
Buddha may have been of a foreign race. But there is little to support 
this theory and much that goes to disprove it. The germs of the 
philosophy of the Upanisads lie buried in the (priestly) Atharva-Veda 
and Brahmanas, and it is from them that we have to derive the un- 
systematic philosophic utterances of the later sages in whose debates, 
however, the Rajas of the day probably took the condescending interest 
customary to cultured royalty and in which, when they took part, they 
were credited with victory ” (Hopkins: Ethics of India). 

Page 229, n. 2. — Svayam eva raj ate. Then it means he is self- 
luminous or self-dependent. 

Page 234. — Dhatuprasada is the expression used. Kafha Up., 
ii. 20. 

Page 241. — The term jivanmukta is a later one, though the idea is 
contained in the Upanisads. Cp., e.g., Katha Up., vi. 14. 

Page 267. — See also Belvalkar and Ranade: History of Indian 
Philosophy, vol. ii; Keith: The Religion and Philosophy of the Veda, 
2 vols.; and Ranade: A Constructive Survey of Upanisadic Philosophy. 



NOTES 


709 


CHAPTER V 

Page 274. — Sanjaya’s scepticism influenced considerably Buddha’s 
attitude to metaphysics and the Jaina view of Saptabhahgi. Cp. 
“ If you ask me whether there is another world (atthi paraloko) — 
well, if I thought there were, I would say so. And I do not think it 
is thus or thus. And I do not think it is otherwise. And I do not 
deny it ” ( Sacred Books of the Buddhists, vol. ii, p. 75). 

Page 278. — Bhaskara, in his commentary on Brahma Sutra (iii. 3. 53), 
refers to the Sutra of Brhaspati. 

Page 279.- — If Carvaka is a proper name, it may be the name of a 
pupil of Brhaspati. It is often regarded as a common name. See 
Macdonell: Sanskrit Literature, p. 450. 

Page 283. — Materialism is ranked with the Samkhya and the Yoga 
in the Arthasastra. See i. 2. 


CHAPTER VI 

Page 288. — It is sometimes said that the Jains have ten Niryuktas 
as well as a number of Bhasyas. 

Page 294. — Inductive truths are derived from anupapatti or 
the impossibility of conceiving the opposite. See Pramcyahamala- 
martanda, pp. 40, 50, 100-1. 

Page 295. — The validity of knowledge consists in the faithful 
representation of objects, while it is tested by practical efficiency. 

Page 297. — " Although all these (five stages) are in a way the 
same, they have different designations in virtue of being special phases. 
In some cases the succession is unobserved by reason of rapid 
origination ” ( Pramdi}anayatatlvdlokdlamkdra , ii). 


CHAPTER VII 

Page 342. — Cp. K. J. Saunders: “ The great keynotes of our modern 
scientific thinking, causality and the unity of the universe, even if 
Gautama did not first formulate them, were popularised by him ” 
[Epochs in Buddhist History, p. ix). 

Page 343. — The Tipitaka contains products of different ages. 
Whether or not the Canon of the Dharma and the Vinaya as found 
to-day were composed at the first Council, it is clear that the elders 
of the faith gathered together soon after the demise of Buddha and 
discussed questions of doctrine and discipline. We are on more certain 
ground with regard to the second Council at Vesali, dated a hundred 
years after the death of Buddha, which was aimed specifically at the 
repudiation of the ten errors wdiich crept into the doctrine in the 
meantime. It ,may well be that the Canon w'as actually drawn up at 



710 


INDIAN PHILOSOPHY 


the third Council of Pataliputra, presided over by Tissa, which met 
during Asoka’s time, and by then different sects developed on the 
basis of the master’s teaching. ASoka’s edicts protest against the 
schismatic tendencies of his age. The Ceylonese tradition relates that 
the Canon composed at the third Council was carried to Ceylon by 
Mahinda, the pupil of Tissa and the younger brother or the son of 
Asoka (according to another tradition), and committed to record under 
Vattagamani. See Keith: Buddhist Philosophy, pp. 3, 13-32. 

Page 344. — Professor Keith thinks that the Abhidhamma Pitaka is 
the work of Vibhajyavadins. See Buddhist Philosophy, pp. 152-3. 

Page 346. — Buddhaghosa wrote a commentary on the Dlgha Nikaya 
called Sumangalavildsini. 

Page 353. — See Silacara: Discourses of Gotarna, the Buddha, vol. ii, 
xxxv and xxxvi. 

Page 353, n. 1. — See Culasaccaka Sutta, M.N. (35), i. 237, 

Page 354. — We read from the Jatakas of cow sacrifices (i. 144) and 
even human sacrifices (iii. 314). 

Page 356. — The Jatakas refer frequently to the degeneration of the 
Brahmin and his eagerness for money. In i. 77, the king’s chaplain 
persuades a young Brahmin, who is opposed to the sacrifice, in these 
words: “ My son, this means money to us, a great deal of money.” 
Similarly, when the disciple of the royal priest protests against animal 
sacrifices, he is told: "We shall have abundance of dainties to eat; 
only hold your peace” (iii. 314). The jackal in the Srigala Jdlaka 
says, " The Brahmins are full of greed for wealth” (i. 142; see also 
iv. 496). 

Page 360, n. 1. — M.N., i. 265. 

Page 362. — Cp. the four truths of Buddhism with the division of 
medical topics into disease, origin of disease, health and healing. 
Y.B., ii. 15. 

Page 370.- — Though the idea of orderly development is contained 
in the Upanisads (see Katha), the Buddhist formula of causality 
emphasises it. 

Later Buddhist texts make the important distinction between 
causes generally (paccaya) and the cause proper (hetu), which is the 
real producer of the result, the other causes being conditions, coeffi- 
cients or auxiliaries. The Patthana classifies conditions under twenty- 
four heads. The power of one idea to affect another is called, in later 
Buddhism, satti or ability. 

Page 371, n. — See A.N., i. 286; S.N., ii. 25; D.N., ii. 198. 

Page 373. — Mahdvagga, i. 21; S.N., i. 133; iv. 157 and 399. It 
is difficult to say definitely when the theory of momentariness (ksani- 
kavada) was formulated. Kathdvattu (viii. 8) seems to be familiar 
with it. Ekacitta ksanikd sabbe dhamma. All things are momentary 
like mental states. Disappearance is the very essence of existence. 
Whatever exists perishes at the next moment. Everything comes 
out of nothing and vanishes into nothing. Nyayabindutika, p. 68; 
see also Ratnakirti’s Ksanabhahgasiddhi. ( 


1 



NOTES 


711 


Page 374. — On the view of momentariness, causation is neither the 
evolution of the cause into the effect, nor the creation by the cause 
of an effect different from itself, but is the necessary succession of 
determined effects. No real causality can be attributed to the strictly 
momentary. 

Kathavattu (xvii. 3; xxi. 7 and 8) seems to admit the possibility 
of acts without fruits. See also xii. 2; xvii. 1. In Milinda, the 
arhat is said to suffer pain over which he has no mastery (pp. 134 ff.). 
It expressly asserts chance (animitta); pp. i 3 o ff. 

Page 376, n. 1. — Proceedings of the Aristotelian Society, 1919, p. 236. 

Page 380. — The doctrine of pratityasamutpada or the formula of 
causation, which has for its first member avidya (ignorance), lends 
support to the subjective view of the world. 

Page 381. — The doctrine of perception suggested in the early 
literature ( Majjhima N., iii. 242) supports a realistic view of the world. 

The Abhidhamma regards the four elements as underived matter 
and makes ether (akaia) a derived one ( Dhanimasahgani , M.N., i. 423, 
ii. 17). We find sometimes mention of six real elements where space 
and consciousness are added to the ordinary four elements (see 
Itivuttaka, 44, 51 and 73). 

Page 382, n. 1. — M.N., i. 426. 

Page 384, n. 1. — See also Mahaniddna Sutta, D.N., ii. 66; M.N., i. 
138, 300; S.N., iii. 66, iv. 34. 

Page 385. — In the Alagaddupama Sutta (M.N., i. 140), Buddha 
repudiates the pantheistic view which identifies the self with the world. 

Page 386. — For the dialogue of Vacchagotta, see Aggivacchagotta 
Sutta, M.N., 72; i. 484-489. See Dahlke: Buddhism and its Place in 
the Mental Life of Mankind, pp. 37 ff. 

Page 387. — The Vajjiputtakas adopt the view of pudgala or person 
over and above the impermanent factors of empiric individuality. 
They maintain that the person, though implicated in the elements of 
empiric individuality, is quite distinct from them, even as fire is neither 
the same as nor different from the burning stick, but is something mure 
than the stick. M. Poussin writes: “ I cannot help thinking that 
the pudgalavada is more in harmony with the duhkhasatya and the 
law of karman than the nairatmyavada ” (J.R.A.S., 1901, p. 308). 
Vasubandhu, the Sautrantika, objects to the view of an uncaused, 
eternal, changeless self, inactive and inefficient. 

Mrs. Rhys Davids summarises her views on this question thus: 
(1) So far as we can trace it, the earliest teaching we call Buddhist 
did not deny the very man, or self. To see this, we must shed our own 
standpoint of the eighteenth century in force still with us; we must 
imagine the power of the word atman, attan for an educated Indian 
of the seventh century b.c., when invited by a religious teacher that 
he would do well to ‘ seek the attan.' Almost it was tantamount to 
bidding him ‘ seek God,' or, ‘ seek the Holy Spirit within yourselves.' 
This is said to have been one of the earliest addresses of the founder 
of Buddhism. Vinaya, i. 23 (Mahavagga, 1. 14); Buddhist Psychology, 



712 


INDIAN PHILOSOPHY 


pp. 28 ff. It is historically of deep significance. And it is supported 
by many passages in the four chief books ( Nikayas ) and the Dhamma - 
pada, where the subject is man’s communing with and knowing 
himself — ways, too, of wording which are not maintained in later 
teaching. 

“What was denied from the very first was that man, the spirit, the 
attan, could rightly be considered as either body or mind. Were he 
either or both, then as being things so weak and transient as either of 
these, he could not will-to-become (as will he did) ; he could not be 
chooser of his destiny. This is not to deny that the ‘ man-in-man ’ 
is. It is to say: ‘ Form not so wrong a notion of what you really are.’ 
But to have said, at that day in India, ‘ You are neither the one nor 
the other, therefore you are not at all, you, that is, are just only a 
hundle of both,’ would have made the new gospel an absurdity, an 
insult on the intelligence of the hearer. 

“ (2) Yet even now the Southern Buddhist in Asia and the very 
latest writers on Buddhism in the West fail to discern the change 
which spread like a very canker over Buddhism in this matter. 

“ (3) Is there none who wall vindicate this helper of men, noble 
and wise? Is there none who will understand that he who brings 
the new message, which we call a religion, to men is one who, whatever 
he did teach, did not teach certain things because he simply could 
not, being who he was, so teach. If we have what I have put forward 
above as a right perspective in contemplating the relation: Mandater 
of gospel; the mandate or gospel; the mandated (viewed as the two 
terms of the relation and the bond between them), then shall we be 
sure that the mandater, in appealing to the very ‘ man-in-man,’ could 
not tell the mandated that this ‘ he ’ was not real, was non-existent. 
We shall be sure that he W'ould, on the contrary, strengthen man’s 
belief in his reality by enlarging man’s knowledge about himself. No 
less sure shall we be, that the mandater could not, in so enlarging 
man’s knowledge, and thereby bringing about a new becoming, a 
fresh change in man, tell the mandated that there was, in man, that 
which was unchangeable.” — Calcutta Review, November 1927. 

Page 387, n. 1. — M.N., i. 256. 

Page 399, «. 3. — See D.N., ii. 62. 

Page 403.— According to M.N., i. 190, three factors are involved 
in perception, objects, senses and the acts of attention. 

Page 404.- — In the Dhammasangani, citta includes the five forms of 
tense cognition, activity of mind and representative cognition, while 
jetasika covers the other three aggregates of feelings, perceptions and 
dispositions. 

Page 406. — Buddhaghosa regards perception (samjna), intelligence 
(vijnana) and intuition (prajiia) as successive steps in a staircase 
comparable to the different reactions provoked by the sight of precious 
metals in a child who sees in them coloured objects, in a citizen who 
recognises their exchange value, and in an expert who knows all about 
their origin and development. See Buddhaghosa on M.N., i. 292. 



NOTES 


718 


We have no systematic account of the emotions in the Buddhist 
Canon. Lobha or attraction or appetite, dosa or aversion, and moha 
or delusion are mentioned along with their opposites of alobha, adosa, 
and amoha, disinterestedness, amity and right knowledge. Feelings 
of friendship or love (metta), sympathy with suffering (karuna) and 
sympathy with happiness or joy (mudita) are also mentioned. The 
idea of continuity (samtati) is found in the Abhidhamma ( Dhamma - 
sahgani, 585, 643, 734; Kathavatlu, x. 1; xi. 6 and xxi. 4; Abhidham- 
mattasangaha, v. 12, 15 and 16). Experiences of objects leave behind 
their seeds or impressions in the consciousness-continuum, and in the 
fulness of time the seed ripens and rises into consciousness and we have 
recognition. This consciousness-series reaches its end only at libera- 
tion. This view of continuity is developed by the Sautrantikas, who 
regard the person as equivalent to cittasarirtana. 

Page 409.- — Though rebirth is new birth, there is, however, con- 
tinuity between the consciousness which appears at birth and the 
consciousness at the time of death ( Milinda , p. 47). This is why it is 
often urged that the last thought at the time of death has an essential 
influence on the form of rebirth. 

Page 410. — The individual carries with him at every moment his 
future ( Milinda , p. 101). Each moment of our life is charged with 
the satti or the force of the past, and the present impresses itself on 
all that follows, perfuming it, as it were, as the term vasana indicates. 

Page 411. — The first moment of the new life is called vijiiana, but 
it is the third member on the list. Its antecedents are the good and 
the bad dispositions sticking to it from the beginning. They are called 
samskaras or prenatal forces. Avidya, the first member, represents 
the defiling character of ignorance. 

Page 411, n. 1. — S.N., ii. 10. 

Page 411, n. 3.— V. 388; A.N., i. 177. 

Page 414.— While consciousness is said to pass from life to death, 
we are not sure whether it is visible in itself or is accompanied by a 
subtle body. 

Page 414, n, 1. — D.N., ii. 63. 

Page 415.— For the different views about the chain of causation, 
see Keith: Badd. Phil., pp. 105-111. 

Page 417, n. 1. — Dhammapada , 60. 

Page 421. — See PSilacdra: Discourses op Gotama, the Buddha, vol. i, 

p. 41. 

Page 422. — Milinda (pp. 95, 117} refers to the doctrine that a man 
may transfer his merit to another instead of keeping it to himself. 

Page 423. — Intuition is intimately related to intelligence. See 
Majjhima N., i. 292 ff. 

Page 432, n. 4. — D.N., i. 124. 

Page 438. — “ There is nothing to show that Buddha tried to 
abolish caste as a social institution. There was no reason why he 
should do so in so far as his teaching could be enforced that the true 
Brahmin was tl^e virtuous brahmin. And within the order, caste did 



714 


INDIAN PHILOSOPHY 


disappear, and there are many instances of low-caste persons being 
admitted as monks ” (E. J. Thomas: The Life of Buddha, 128; see 
also Uddna, v. 5). One of Buddha’s early disciples is a barber who 
later became a leader in the Order. In the Aggaiiha Suttanta (D.N., 
iii. 80 ff.), the claims of the Brahmins to pre-eminence on the ground 
of birth are contemptuously set aside. 

Page 440.— We, however, come across statements, though they are 
very few, that accidental happenings which do not apparently conform 
to the law of karma are possible. Kathavattu, xvii. 3; xvi. 8; Milinda, 
pp. 135 ff., 180. These are really exceptions which prove the rule. 

See Majjhima N ., ii. 104. 

Page 443. — Early Buddhism admits the reality of invisible world 
systems each containing three regions or worlds, those of desire (kama), 
of material form (rupa) and the formless ones (arupa). The first are 
the abodes of ghosts (pretas), of demons (asuras), of men and of gods. 
The second includes the brahmalokas, sixteen in number, distinguished 
according to the gods freed from desires, who abide there. Those who 
practice the four meditations and are freed from rebirth remain there 
until they attain nirvana. The world without form is the dwelling of 
those who carry out the formless meditations. 

Page 446. — The Vaibhasikas accept this intermediate state with a 
quasi-material transporting (ativahika) body. 

Page 447. — The beautiful poetry of the Thera and the Then gathas 
is inspired by ideas of the happiness of nirvana, which is capable of 
attainment even in this life (see Dtgha N., i. 84). 

Page 448. — For Nagasena there is temporal experience for the 
individuals who are reborn; for those freed from samsara there is no 
temporal experience. Time belongs to the stuff of worldly life (see 
Milinda, pp. 50 ff.). 

Page 449. — See M.N., i. 487; S.N., iv. 347; iii. 109. Cp. also 
Patisambhiddmagga , i. 143-5. 

Page 450.' — According to Milinda (p. 271), space and nirvana last 
independently of all forms of causation. 

Page 452. — See M.Y. (63), i. 427-432. 

Page 453 n. — Alagaddtipama Suita, M.N., i. 140— 1. 

Page 455.- — In the cosmic evolution, men of great merit secure the 
rank of gods. Even the appearance of Brahma with the delusion 
that he is self-created (svayambhu) is in accordance with this principle. 

Page 456 n. — See Lakshminarasu : Essence of Buddhism, pp. 261-2, 
275 ~ 6 - 

Page 465. — See Pratt: The Pilgrimage of Buddhism, chap. v. 

Page 472. — The Samkhya conception of the constant process of 
nature is analogous to the Buddhist conception of the world as a 
perpetual becoming. In both, the law of causality governs the process. 
The stress on avidya as the cause of all misery is common to the two 
systems. 

Page 473. — The ideas of the Yoga system had a powerful hold on 
early Buddhism. Alarakalama and Udduka, two teachers of Buddha, 



NOTES 


715 


were adepts in the practice of Yoga. It is quite possible and very- 
probable that Buddha borrowed his ideas of the discipline of mind 
from the Yoga system, as the use of the words citta (thought), nirodha 
(suppression) suggests. The Yoga makes ignorance the cause of 
misery and regards it as a klesa or defilement which is at the root of 
all others. The four stages of samadhi or concentration may have 
been the original of the Buddhist view of the four ordinary meditations 
(Y.S.T., 17). The four brahmaviharas of friendship, sympathy with 
sorrow, sympathy with happiness and indifference have also their 
parallel in the Yoga system (Y.S.I., 33). It is not difficult to trace 
the chain of causation to the Yoga philosophy (iv. 11). See also 
Stcherbatsky: The Conception of Buddhist Nirvana, pp. 2 ff. 

Page 476. — See also Keith: Buddhist Philosophy. 


CHAPTER VIII 

Page 480. — The conception of “ trimurti ” is often regarded as of 
a much later date. See Hopkins: The Great Epic, pp. 46, 184. We 
can trace it, however, to the Maitri Up., iv and v, though the part of 
the Upanisad in which it occurs is regarded as a late addition. 

Page 483. — The passage in which Buddha is mentioned in the 
Rdmdyana is said to be an interpolation. 

Page 490. — In the first two stages of the development of the Epic, 
Visnu with his Vedic ancestry, Narayana, the cosmic god controlling 
the whole evolution of the universe, Vasudeva, the saviour god, and 
Krsna, the friend and comforter, meet and coalesce. See Santi P., 
341. 20-6. 342. 129. 

Page 492, n. 2. — “ Apo nara iti prokta apo vai narasunavah 
ayanam tasyatah purvam tena narayana smrtah.” 

Page 496. — Dr. Jha quotes an ingenious suggestion that “ the 
system (pancaratra) is so called by reason of the fact that it was 
promulgated for the purpose of meeting the religious cravings of men 
during the five days the Vedas remained with the demon from whom 
they were rescued by Visnu before the recreation of the world after 
pralaya ” ( Hindustan Review, January 1924, p. 219). 

Page 504, n. 5. — Caksuh pasyati rupani manasa na caksusa. 

Page 505, n. 3. — Duhkhad udvijate sarvas sarvasya sukham ipsitam. 

Page 308, n. 10. — 

Papam karma krtam kincid yadi tasmin na dffiyate, 

Nrpate tasya putresu pautresvapi ca naptrsu. 

Page 511. — Time and nature are not peculiarly Buddhistic. They 
belong to the early naturalistic speculations as well. See Atharua 
Veda, xix. 53, where time is deified. 



716 


INDIAN PHILOSOPHY 


CHAPTER IX 

Page 531 n. — Anandagiri, who refers to a Vrttikara twice in his 
Tikd, S.B.G. (pp. 6 and 27 of the Anandairama ed.), does not identify 
him with Bodhayana. 

Page 538 n. — See also R.V., x. 129. 

Page 542. — Lalane tadane matur nakarunyam yatha’rbhake 
Tadvad eva mahesasya niyantur gunadosayoh. 

Page 544. — Bhdgavata, i. 3. 2. 8. 

Page 555 n. — Bradley: Appearance and Reality, pp. 5-6. 

Page 565 . — “ The worship of the Blessed One does not express 
itself in mere ecstasy. In it the whole of one’s being is engaged. 
' He is of right purpose.’ In this rightness of purpose there is the 
guarantee of righteousness in deed ” (McKenzie: Hindu Ethics, p. 131). 

Page 569. — Cp. Nivrttir api mudhasya pravrttir upajayate 
Pravrttir api dhirasya nivrtti-phalabhagin!. 

Page 572. — See M.B., iardi P., 320. 36 and 38. 

Page 576. — See B.G., v. 23-5. 


CHAPTER X 

Page 590. — In the Mahayana, Buddha loses his human character 
and is endowed with superhuman powers. The Jatakas of the Hinayana 
give place to the Avadanas or the glorious achievements of Buddha 
and his followers. 

Page 592. — In the Mahaydnasamparigrahasastra, Asanga enumerates 
seven points in which the Mahayana may be regarded as superior to 
the Sravakayana. “ The Mahayana is comprehensive; whatever has 
been taught by Buddha, not by Sakyamuni in one life alone, is 
accepted; nay, more, as we have seen, whatever is well said, is to be 
deemed the word of a Buddha. Secondly, the Mahayana aims at 
general salvation, not at individual release, thus excelling in love for 
all created things. Thirdly, the Mahayana is intellectually wider in 
range than the Hinayana; the latter denies the reality of the self, 
the former goes so far as to deny all phenomenal reality whatever. 
Fourthly, the Mahayana inculcates spiritual energy; to seek swift 
release for oneself is not its aim as it is that of the Sravaka. Fifthly, 
the Mahayana is skilled in the manifold means (upaya) to lead men to 
salvation; it is unwearied in their varied application. Moreover, it 
leads to a far higher ideal ; the adept aims to become not a mere saint 
but a Buddha in his complete perfection. Lastly, when an adept 
becomes a Buddha, he has the infinite power of manifesting himself 
throughout the universe in a body of bliss.” See Suzuki: Mahayana 
Buddhism, ch. ii. 

Page 594. — Vasubandhu says that the transitoriness of existence and 
the eternity of nirvana are both implied by the reality of the absolute. 


t 



NOTES 


717 


Page 597. — In the Hinayana, the physical body of the Buddha is 
distinguished from the body of the law which each man has to realise 
for himself. Later in the Dwydiuddna (pp. 19 £f.; see Dlgha N., iii. 
84), we find the idea that the material body of the Buddha is the body, 
while his soul is the law. The true nature or soul of Buddha is the 
intuition (prajiia) or enlightenment (bodhi) attained by him. When 
expressed in metaphysical terms, it is the ultimate reality which 
underlies the phenomenal universe. While this reality belongs to 
every Buddha, each Buddha is said to have at the same time a dharma 
kaya of his own. The dharmakaya is identified with the tathata, or 
primitive undifferentiated reality, or the womb of the Tathagata, or 
the source of every individual being ( Lamkavatdra , p. 80). Each 
Buddha is conceived as possessing a body of ineffable brilliance which 
is called sambhogakaya. The relation of sambhogakaya to dharmakaya 
is explained by Candrakirti ( Madhyamakavatara , iii. 12). Those 
equipped with wisdom (jnana), as the Buddhas, reach dharmakaya, 
while those equipped with merit (punya), as the Bod’nisattvas, reach 
sambhogakaya. One cannot, however, be sure of this, since the 
Mahayana literature gives visible forms to Amitabha and Sakyamuni. 

Page 597 n. — See Sutralariikara, ix. 77, and Karaydavyuha. There 
is no absolute being possible even for a Buddha. 

Page 598. — " Those who worship the Bodbisattvas and read the 
Mahayana Sutras are called the Mahayamsts ( I-Tsing : Takakusu’s 
E.T., p. 14). 

The conception of law as the body of the Buddha is suggested in 
the Canon. The Sautrantikas seem to accept a body of bliss, one of 
the three kayas. 

Page 599. — The conception of the absolute realising itself in Buddhas 
and Bodhisattvas is of great religious value. It shows how the absolute 
is co-operating with the individual to secure for him the bliss of 
deliverance. 

Page 600. — The radiant vijnana transforms itself into active 
intellect and develops into the world of matter and consciousness. 

Page 601. — See also Mahavastu. 

Page 602.- — The Bodhisattva, out of compassion, is prepared to face 
the tortures of hell [Bodhicaryavatdra, vi. 120; Siksasamuccaya, p. 167). 
The sufferings of the Bodhisattvas are not the penalties of past crimes, 
but opportunities for the exercise of their perfections ( Bodhicaryavatdra , 
vi. 106). To the Bodhisattvas we owe homage and adoration. By 
confessing our sins to them we merit their forgiveness (ibid., vi. 119. 
122. 124; cp. also Siksdsamuccaya, pp. 160 ff .). By the transfer of 
one’s merit, one can please the Bodhisattvas ( Bodhicaryavatdra , v. 85 ; 
Siksdsamuccaya, p. 127). Santideva is alive to the folly of the man 
who hands over his body to the wild beasts for food, when he could 
confer on others the precious gift of the knowledge of the true faith 
{Siksdsamuccaya, pp. 119 and 34 ff.; Bodhicaryavatdra, v. 86 ff.; 
Bodhisattvabhumi, i. ix). There is no disgust with life. The rigours 
of monasticism are relaxed, and the householder is regarded as being 



718 


INDIAN PHILOSOPHY 


in a favourable position for the attainment of Buddhahood. See 
Suzuki: Mahay ana Buddhism, chap. xii. 

Page 603. — We cannot say how enlightenment arises. “ The 
ancient alone knoweth the incomprehensible faith of action in that he 
doth lead to release men, even when they have abandoned thought 
of enlightenment ” (Bodhicarydvatara, iv. 27). 

Page 604, n. 3. — Ragadvesamohaksayat parinirvanam. 

Page 605 . — Vimalakirti Sutra gives a positive account of nirvana. 
It admits the possibility of the growth of insight in the midst of life 
with all its distractions. Nirvana is samsara, and we must try to 
attain nirvana in and through life and not through abstention from 
its activities. According to Asariga’s Mahay anasamparigrahasastra, 
the Buddha, though free from attachment and defilement, is yet full 
of compassion for the departed souls who are to be rescued by him. 

Page 610.' — See also K. J. Saunders: Epochs in Buddhist History, 
Sir Charles Eliot: Hinduism and Buddhism ; J. B. Pratt: The 

Pilgrimage of Buddhism. 


CHAPTER XI 

Page 61 1 n . — See Atoka’s Bhabru edict and Divydvaddna, p. 272. 
In Anguttara N. (iv. 163), Buddha is compared to a granary whence 
men bring every good word. See Vincent Smith: Asoka, p. 154. 

Page 613. — On Sarvastivada or the view that everything exists, 
see Stcherbatsky’s The Central Conception of Buddhism. Sarvastivada 
was an ancient school of Buddhism of which the Vaibhasika system 
is a continuation. 

Page 613 n . — Dhamatrata is the author of Udanavarga and Samyu- 
ktdbhidharmahrdayasastra. M. M. Haraprasad Sastri says that “ Arya- 
deva hails from Kanci ” (Indian Historical Quarterly, 1925, p. 111). 

Page 615. — The self or living being is not an ultimate fact, while 
the real elements (dharmas) are. Nairatmya or soullessness is the 
negative way of expressing the existence of ultimate reality (dharmata) ; 
only what we call the soul is not that. Cp. Yatomitra on Abhidharma- 
kola, ix. Pravacanadharmata punar atra nairatmyam buddhanusasanl 
va. Stcherbatsky says: “ Buddhism never denied the existence of a 
personality or a soul, in the empirical sense; it only maintained that 
it was no ultimate reality (not a dharma) ” (see The Central Con- 
ception of Buddhism, pp. 25-26). 

" The elements had four salient feaures: (1) they were not sub- 

stance — this refers to all the seventy-five elements, whether eternal 
or impermanent; (2) they had no duration — this refers only to the 
seventy-two impermanent elements of phenomenal existence ; (3) they 
were unrest — this refers only to one part of the latter class, that which 
roughly corresponds to the ordinary man as opposed to the purified 
condition of the elements of a saint (arya) ; (4) and their unrest had 
its end in final deliverance. Speaking technically: (1) all dharmas 

are anatman, (2) all samskrta dharmas are anitya, (3) all sasruva 



NOTES 


719 


dharmas are duhkha, and (4) their nirvana alone is £anta. An element 
is non-substantial, it is evanescent, it is in a beginningless state of 
commotion, and its final suppression is the only balm.” 

Regarding the relation of the permanent elements to their mani- 
festations, the Vibhasa seems to suggest four different views. Dharma- 
trata maintains unity of substance (dravya) along with change in 
existence (bhava). The essence remains unchanged while the existence 
alters as when milk changes into curds. This view seems to be 
influenced by the Samkhya theory. Ghosa assumes that elements, 
though existent in the past, present and future, change their aspect 
(laksana) at different times. This view is not generally accepted, as it 
implies the co-existence of the different aspects at the same time. 
Buddhadeva thinks that the past, the present and the future are 
contingent on one another, and the same entity may be described as 
past, present or future in accordance with its relation to the preceding 
or succeeding moment, even as a woman may be regarded as mother, 
wife or daughter. This view does not find acceptance, as it is said to 
involve a confusion of the three periods of time. Vasumitra advocates 
a change of condition (avastha), i.e. of efficiency in the present and 
non-efficiency in the past and the future. When an entity has per- 
formed its function and has ceased to act, it is past; when it is pro- 
ducing it, it is present; when it has not yet produced it, it is future. 
There is real existence in all the three states. The past is real, for 
were it not so, it could not be the object of knowledge, nor could it 
determine the present. The Vaibhasikas generally accept the view 
of- Vasumitra. The Vibhajyavadins adopt the view that the present 
elements and those among the past which have not yet produced their 
function are existent, while the future elements and those of the past 
which have produced their function are non-existent. See Stcher- 
batsky: The Central Conception of Buddhism, p. 46, and Appendix 1; 
Keith: Budd. Phil., pp. 104-5. 

Page 616. — The Sarvastivada holds that there are fourteen kinds 
of atoms answering to the five sense-organs, the five sense-objects and 
the four mahabhutas. These atoms are not eternal like those of the 
VaiSesikas or the Jainas. In consistency with the doctrine of momen- 
tariness (ksanikavada), they are said to spring into being from time 
to time and lapse into non-being. Even the paramanus, which 
are said to sustain the atoms, are not permanent, since they are 
subject to the fourfold process of birth, continuance, decay and 
destruction. 

The Sarvastivada admits the existence of what is called the avijnap- 
tirupa or unmanifested matter. The Buddhist theory requires that 
every physical act, word or thought should have some corresponding 
result. Every act modifies the nature and position of the molecules. 
Even where it does not do so visibly, it must do so invisibly, for it 
is impossible that an action can have no result. tA hile the Sarvasti- 
vadins admitted the reality of avij naptirupa, they were not decided 

about its nature. Harivarman, in his Scittvcisiddhi , makes out that it 

» 



720 


INDIAN PHILOSOPHY 


is neither physical nor mental and belongs to cittavipraynkta dharmas. 
As the Sarvastivadins claim that all character is ultimately material, 
avijnaptirupa is also a rupa dharma. 

Page 616, n. i. — The Caitta dharmas are distinct from citta and 
not mere phases of it as in the Yogacara. The later Sthaviravadins 
gave a relative unity to citta and caitasika dharmas, where citta is 
compared to a sphere and caitasikas to sections of it. The caitasikas 
are elements out of which mental complexes are made. “ Just as 
the four mahabhutas and the five sense-object atoms may combine in 
an infinite number of ways to form the complex external world around 
us, so may the various caitasikas be compounded in an infinite number 
of ways, ranging from the simple thoughts and desires of a child to the 
most abstruse metaphysical inference ” (McGovern: Buddhist Phil., 
p. 138). The caitasikas are broadly distinguished into (1) general 
mental properties which are neither meritorious nor demeritorious, 
(2) meritorious and (3) demeritorious. While the Sthaviravadins have 
only these three, the Sarvastivadins and the Yogacaras add a fourth 
indeterminate. 

Page 617. — See Abhidkarmakosa, iv. ib; also Stcherbatsky: The 
Conception of Buddhist Nirvana, pp. 27-29. 

Page 618. — " Pratisariikhya means conscious deliberation and is a 
type of intelligence, since it deliberates upon each of the four noble 
truths. The attainment of cessation or nirodha by means of th& 
power of deliberation is therefore called pratisamkhyanirodha, just as 
a cart pulled by bullocks is called a bullock-cart by the elimination 
of the middle term” ( Abhidhai inakosa , i. 3b; McGovern: Buddhist 
Phil., p. in). 

The Sarvastivadins “ make a difference between the essence and 
the manifestations of the dharmas. At the time of nirvana, the 
manifestations have ceased for ever, and there will be no rebirth, but 
this essence remains. It is nevertheless a kind of entity where there 
is no consciousness ” (Stcherbatsky: The Central Conception oj 

Buddhism, p. 53). 

See Abhidkarmakosa, iii. 30, where a distinction is made between 
the perception of “ blue ” and the judgment “ this is blue.” 

Page 619. — The Abhidkarmakosa insists on the importance of 
volition (see iv). The accidental destruction of a human being when 
aiming at a pumpkin is no murder. This view is perhaps intended 
against the Jaina argument that a man who slays, however unwittingly, 
is guilty of murder, even as one who touches fire, however unknowingly, 
is burned. The Abhidkarmakosa distinguishes the psychological from 
the physical effect of action. A volition leaves only an impression 
(vasana) on the mental series, while the bodily acts produce some- 
thing quasi-material, called by the scholastics, avijnapti, which persists 
and develops without any consciousness on the part of the individual. 
I he mechanism of rebirth is more clearly conceived. The last con- 
sciousness of life determines the new birth to be achieved. Rebirth 
or consciousness of conception (pratisarnltm ijnana^ is a continuation 



NOTES 


721 


of the last consciousness before death. The last consciousness of the 
dying man creates for itself the necessary body out of unorganised 
matter. 

Page 619, n. 1 . — The three are one and the same thing, functioning 
in different ways. “ The Buddhists, at least the Sarvastivadins and 
the Sthaviravadins, agree that there is only a difference in terminology, 
and that the thing spoken of is the same ” (McGovern: Buddhist Phil., 
P- 132). 

Page 621. — The Sautrantikas dispute the Vaibhasika belief in the 
existence of permanent substances persisting through all time. They 
contend that, if the past is to be regarded as real on the ground that 
it exercises efficiency, it cannot be distinguished from the present. 
It is idle to argue that we cannot know non-existent entities. Entities 
which are actually non-efficient are also known. To distinguish 
between an entity and its efficiency is untenable, for it is difficult to 
know why an entity suddenly assumes active efficiency. The Sautranti- 
kas maintain that all entities are momentary, suddenly come into 
being, exist for a moment and pass out into non-existence. Their 
existence and efficiency are one. It follows that “ things ” are mere 
names for certain momentary colours, tastes, etc., fictitiously unified 
under a label. The self is also a designation for a series of momentary 
psychic happenings which are in causal relation. Memory requires no 
self but only an earlier experience. It arises when the suitable condi- 
tions of attention, freedom from pain and the like are present. The 
last moment of the consciousness series determines the new life. It is 
not clear whether the seed of consciousness has any subtle matter 
accompanying it into a new body or not. See Keith: Budd. Phil., 
p. 166. 

“ The Sautrantikas are credited with three different views of the 
nature of the perception of an object. (1) All its characteristics are 
represented in thought form and so apprehended; (2) thought form 
is of the total actual presentation only, e.g. of variegated colour as 
such; (3) all aspects of the object are presented in thought, but it 
synthesises them in one view, e.g. the different colours are made one ” 
(ibid., 1C2 n.). 

Page 622. — According to the Abhidhavmakoia, the phenomenon of 
knowledge is resolved into a simultaneous appearance of a number 
of elements. There is no question of contact, influence or interrelation. 
A movement of colour (rupa), a movement of the visual sense (caksuh), 
a movement of pure consciousness (citta) arise simultaneously in close 
contiguity and constitute the sensation (sparSa) or colour. The 
element of consciousness always appears, supported by an object 
(visaya) and a receptive organ (indriya). The consciousness is said to 
grasp the object, since there is between consciousness and the object 
a special relation called sarupya or co-ordination. The consciousness 
apprehends the colour and not the visual sense. As a matter of fact, 
what happens is evanescent flashings of consciousness. “ Consciousness 
apprehends in the way in which a light moves. The light of a lamp 



722 


INDIAN PHILOSOPHY 


is a common metaphorical designation for an uninterrupted production 
of a series of flashing flames. When this production changes its place, 
we say that the light has moved. Similarly, consciousness is a conven- 
tional name for a chain of conscious moments. When it changes its 
place ( i.e . appears in consideration with another objective element), 
we say that it apprehends that object " ( Abhidharmskosa , ix; Stcher- 
batsky, p. 57). 

Page 622 n.—Abhidhammatthasangaha gives the four causes as hetu 
which produces the thing, the alambana or the support which produces 
the thought and its sequel, samanantara or the immediately contiguous 
cause which allows in the stream of thought the new presentation, and 
the adhipati, that on whose existence the other depends. See Keith: 
Bndd. Ph., b. 177. 

Svalaksana means the bare particular. 

Page 623. — The Sautrantikas gave up the idea of self-consciousness, 
as the consciousness of the preceding moment by the succeeding con- 
sciousness not only lights the objects but lights itself, even as the 
lamp lights not only the room but itself. All consciousness is self- 
consciousness. For the Sautrantikas, the perception of external things 
is only indirect. Things are known because consciousness takes, 
through the medium of the sense organism, the form of the object 
and is also conscious of itself. We recognise the externality of objects 
on account of their temporary and accidental character, which shows 
that they are not parts of consciousness itself. 

Page 623, n. 1. — See also Ui: The Vaisesika Philosophy, pp. 26-28. 

Page 623, n. 4. — Abhidharmakosavydkkyd, vii. 

Page 624 n. — Keith assigns Dignaga to about a.d. 400. See his 
Budd. Phil., p. 305. 

Vasubandhu’s Vijnaptimdtratdtririisat karika had nearly ten com- 
mentaries on it. Dharmapala, the teacher of Silabhadra who was the 
teacher of Yuan Chwang, wrote Vijhaptimdtratdsiddhisdstra. He up- 
holds subjective idealism in epistemology and refutes all realism. 

Page 625. — To accept the view of Sarvastivada that the world is 
the result of the changing combination of the seventy-five unchanging 
elements is to go against the central truth of impermanence. 

Page 631. — Objects arise in our consciousness as the result of our 
past experience. They seem to be given, while they are the creation 
of our thought. The external world is the product of our thought to 
which we give names and ideas (namasamjnavyavahara). See 
Lamkavatara sutra, p. 85. 

Even the internal distinctions of subject, object and knowledge are 
not real. They are the results of the defilement of thought, though 
we cannot trace the beginning of this defilement. The Alaya has no 
origin, duration or destruction. Particular intellectual movements 
stand to it as the waves to the sea. 

Page 639 n. — The Yogacaras admit eight kinds of vijnana, the five 
answering to the five material sense-organs, the sixth manovijnana of 
a more general character, exercising the functions^ of memory and 



NOTES 


723 

judgment, the seventh klistamano vijnana or literally soiled mind- 
consciousness. McGovern says regarding it: “ Whereas ni.ni nik'ana 
carries on the ordinary process of reasoning, it deals with ideas more 
or less as they come, without consciously or continuously distinguishing 
between that which appertains to the self and that which appears to 
the non-self. This continual distinction is the work of the seventh 
vijnana, which, according to the Yogacaras, functions even when a 
man is asleep, or is otherwise unconscious. It is the basis of the 
constant tendency towards the atman theory, for it falsely considers 
the alayavijiiana to be a real and permanent ego entity, although in 
reality it is in a constant state of flux ” ( Buddhist Pin l , p. 134). The 
same writer speaks of the triple function of the alayavijiiana. “ The 
first we can call the positive, because it stores up the seeds of all other 
vijnanas. The second we can call the negative, because it receives the 
influence of all the other phenomenal vijnanas. The third is this 
vijnana considered as the object of false belief, for the seventh vijhana 
constantly considers that this ever-changing alayavijnana is an eternal 
ego entity” (p. 135). The Yogacaras are inclined to call the sixth 
vijnana, the seventh man as and the eighth citta. 

Page 640, n. 1. — See McGovern: Buddhist Phil., p. 113. 

Page 643. — Kern is of opinion that Buddhism is from the outset a 
system of idealistic nihilism. See M.N., i. 4, 134, 297 and 329; ii. 261; 
iii. 246. 

Page 655. — When Nagarjuna denies Buddha, it is the Hinayana 
view of Buddha conceived as the ultimate goal of the world’s progress 
that he rejects and not the Buddha who is above all empirical deter- 
minations. See Candraklrfi’s M. Vriti, 432 ff. 

Page 662.- — The illusionist tendencies are found developed in 
Buddhapalita and Candraklrti and in a manner in Santideva, while 
the more reasonable view is found in Bhavaviveka’s exposition of 
Nagarjuna’s views. 

Page G64, n. 2. — Cp. also, 

Prabha 4 unyam manassunyam buddhiSunyam niramayam, 
Sarvasunyam nirabhasam samadhis tasya laksanam. 

Page 668. — See Kern: Manual of Indian Buddhism, p. 126. 

Page 699. — See also Keith: Buddhist Philosophy. McGovern: A 
Manual of Buddhist Philosophy. Stcherbatsky : The Central Conception 
of Buddhism ; The Conception of Buddhist Nirvana; Pratt: The 
Pilgrimage of Buddhism, chap, xii 